You know you're in love when you can't fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams. 
A friend is someone who knows all about you and still loves you. 
Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that. 
We accept the love we think we deserve. 
It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are not. 
As he read, I fell in love the way you fall asleep: slowly, and then all at once. 
It is not a lack of love, but a lack of friendship that makes unhappy marriages. 
Love all, trust a few, do wrong to none. 
Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage. 
Love is that condition in which the happiness of another person is essential to your own. 
There is never a time or place for true love. It happens accidentally, in a heartbeat, in a single flashing, throbbing moment. 
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind, And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. 
Love is like the wind, you can't see it but you can feel it. 
If you can make a woman laugh, you can make her do anything. 
You don't love someone because they're perfect, you love them in spite of the fact that they're not. 
The real lover is the man who can thrill you by kissing your forehead or smiling into your eyes or just staring into space. 
If I had a flower for every time I thought of you I could walk through my garden forever. 
To die will be an awfully big adventure. 
There is nothing I would not do for those who are really my friends. I have no notion of loving people by halves, it is not my nature. 
A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony in a moment. 
When someone loves you, the way they talk about you is different. You feel safe and comfortable. 
Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
I love you as certain dark things are to be loved, in secret, between the shadow and the soul. 
Just when you think it can't get any worse, it can. And just when you think it can't get any better, it can. 
One is loved because one is loved. No reason is needed for loving. 
The one you love and the one who loves you are never, ever the same person. 
Love is needing someone. Love is putting up with someone's bad qualities because they somehow complete you. 
We love the things we love for what they are. 
I would die for you. But I won't live for you. 
So, I love you because the entire universe conspired to help me find you. 
The only thing worse than a boy who hates you: a boy that loves you. 
Never love anyone who treats you like you're ordinary. 
You are, and always have been, my dream. 
Where there is love there is life. 
I would always rather be happy than dignified. 
Nobody has ever measured, not even poets, how much the heart can hold. 
Once upon a time there was a boy who loved a girl, and her laughter was a question he wanted to spend his whole life answering. 
We loved with a love that was more than love. 
This is a good sign, having a broken heart. It means we have tried for something. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love. 
He's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same. 
The more I know of the world, the more I am convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require so much! 
I have decided to stick to love Hate is too great a burden to bear. 
They say a person needs just three things to be truly happy in this world: someone to love, something to do, and something to hope for. 
What's meant to be will always find a way 
Two people in love, alone, isolated from the world, that's beautiful. 
The heart was made to be broken. 
This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. 
For the two of us, home isn't a place. It is a person. And we are finally home. 
Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
The very essence of romance is uncertainty. 
There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness. 
Man may have discovered fire, but women discovered how to play with it. 
And, in the end The love you take is equal to the love you make. 
Love does not consist of gazing at each other, but in looking outward together in the same direction. 
Love is a fire. But whether it is going to warm your hearth or burn down your house, you can never tell. 
Love doesn't just sit there, like a stone, it has to be made, like bread; remade all the time, made new. 
If you remember me, then I don't care if everyone else forgets. 
It was love at first sight, at last sight, at ever and ever sight. 
And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. 
If you love somebody, let them go, for if they return, they were always yours. If they don't, they never were. 
If you like her, if she makes you happy, and if you feel like you know her---then don't let her go. 
When love is not madness it is not love. 
I love you more than there are stars in the sky and fish in the sea. 
I love you. Remember. They cannot take it 
Love does not begin and end the way we seem to think it does. Love is a battle, love is a war; love is a growing up. 
Do you think I'm pretty? I think you're beautiful Beautiful? You are so beautiful, it hurts sometimes. 
Be careful of love. It'll twist your brain around and leave you thinking up is down and right is wrong. 
True love is rare, and it's the only thing that gives life real meaning. 
Declarations of love amuse me. Especially when unrequited. 
A woman's heart should be so hidden in God that a man has to seek Him just to find her. 
Love is an irresistible desire to be irresistibly desired. 
I was smiling yesterday,I am smiling today and I will smile tomorrow.Simply because life is too short to cry for anything. 
If I can stop one heart from breaking, I shall not live in vain. 
I think if it is true that there are as many minds as there are heads, then there are as many kinds of love as there are hearts. 
When the power of love overcomes the love of power, the world will know peace. 
It is a curious thought, but it is only when you see people looking ridiculous that you realize just how much you love them. 
Hate the sin, love the sinner. 
The greater the love, the greater the tragedy when it's over. 
One love, one heart, one destiny. 
I loved her against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that could be. 
Of all forms of caution, caution in love is perhaps the most fatal to true happiness. 
All I ever wanted was to reach out and touch another human being not just with my hands but with my heart. 
You know, when it works, love is pretty amazing. It's not overrated. There's a reason for all those songs. 
The most painful thing is losing yourself in the process of loving someone too much, and forgetting that you are special too. 
Gravitation is not responsible for people falling in love. 
We waste time looking for the perfect lover, instead of creating the perfect love. 
Any fool can be happy. It takes a man with real heart to make beauty out of the stuff that makes us weep. 
Never close your lips to those whom you have already opened your heart. 
Find what you love and let it kill you. 
Love is not affectionate feeling, but a steady wish for the loved person's ultimate good as far as it can be obtained. 
Things we lose have a way of coming back to us in the end, if not always in the way we expect. 
The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends. 
One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well. 
I want To do with you what spring does with the cherry trees. 
Look after my heart - I've left it with you. 
I would like to be the air that inhabits you for a moment only. I would like to be that unnoticed and that necessary. 
Have enough courage to trust love one more time and always one more time. 
He does something to me, that boy. Every time. It’s his only detriment. He steps on my heart. He makes me cry. 
You can't measure the mutual affection of two human beings by the number of words they exchange. 
Tonight I can write the saddest lines I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 
Sometimes it's a form of love just to talk to somebody that you have nothing in common with and still be fascinated by their presence. 
Happiness [is] only real when shared 
A DEFINITION NOT FOUND IN THE DICTIONARY Not leaving: an act of trust and love, often deciphered by children 
As if you were on fire from within. The moon lives in the lining of your skin. 
One day you will kiss a man you can't breathe without, and find that breath is of little consequence. 
Promise me you'll never forget me because if I thought you would, I'd never leave. 
I wasn't actually in love, but I felt a sort of tender curiosity. 
Art and love are the same thing: It’s the process of seeing yourself in things that are not you. 
Then I realize what it is. It's him. Something about him makes me feel like I am about to fall. Or turn to liquid. Or burst into flames. 
It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important. 
I loved you like a man loves a woman he never touches, only writes to, keeps little photographs of. 
You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection 
Tears shed for another person are not a sign of weakness. They are a sign of a pure heart. 
There is only one page left to write on. I will fill it with words of only one syllable. I love. I have loved. I will love. 
Someone I loved once gave me a box full of darkness. It took me years to understand that this too, was a gift. 
A half-read book is a half-finished love affair. 
Happiness is holding someone in your arms and knowing you hold the whole world. 
I'm on Aslan's side even if there isn't any Aslan to lead it. I'm going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn't any Narnia. 
To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance. 
I'm oxygen and he's dying to breathe. 
Who, being loved, is poor? 
I like flaws. I think they make things interesting. 
A purpose of human life, no matter who is controlling it, is to love whoever is around to be loved. 
It is easy to love people in memory; the hard thing is to love them when they are there in front of you. 
Love can change a person the way a parent can change a baby- awkwardly, and often with a great deal of mess. 
You know how they say you only hurt the ones you love? Well, it works both ways. 
When I saw you I fell in love, and you smiled because you knew. 
I fell in love with her when we were together, then fell deeper in love with her in the years we were apart. 
Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. 
One word Frees us of all the weight and pain of life: That word is love. 
The love of learning, the sequestered nooks, And all the sweet serenity of books 
What she had realized was that love was that moment when your heart was about to burst. 
Sorrow is how we learn to love. Your heart isn't breaking. It hurts because it's getting larger. The larger it gets, the more love it holds. 
Friendship marks a life even more deeply than love. Love risks degenerating into obsession, friendship is never anything but sharing. 
I guess that’s just part of loving people: You have to give things up. Sometimes you even have to give them up. 
The heart has its reasons which reason knows not. 
The emotion that can break your heart is sometimes the very one that heals it 
The more one judges, the less one loves. 
Holding Eleanor's hand was like holding a butterfly. Or a heartbeat. Like holding something complete, and completely alive. 
Come sleep with me: We won't make Love, Love will make us. 
Trust your heart if the seas catch fire, live by love though the stars walk backward. 
Sometimes love means letting go when you want to hold on tighter. 
Ever has it been that love knows not its own depth until the hour of separation. 
When someone is in your heart, they're never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
Don't cry over someone who wouldn't cry over you. 
Absence diminishes small loves and increases great ones, as the wind blows out the candle and fans the bonfire. 
Being with you never felt wrong. It's the one thing I did right. You're the one thing I did right. 
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love thee to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach 
Let go of me! 
I wonder how many people don't get the one they want, but end up with the one they're supposed to be with. 
When you trip over love, it is easy to get up. But when you fall in love, it is impossible to stand again. 
To be fully seen by somebody, then, and be loved anyhow - this is a human offering that can border on miraculous. 
I want to be in a relationship where you telling me you love me is just a ceremonious validation of what you already show me. 
True love is usually the most inconvenient kind. 
This is where it all begins. Everything starts here, today. 
Nothing takes the taste out of peanut butter quite like unrequited love. 
To lose balance sometimes for love is part of living a balanced life. 
The sunlight claps the earth, and the moonbeams kiss the sea: what are all these kissings worth, if thou kiss not me? 
The things we love destroy us every time, lad. Remember that. 
Throw your dreams into space like a kite, and you do not know what it will bring back, a new life, a new friend, a new love, a new country. 
My wish is that you may be loved to the point of madness. 
If you love something set it free, but don't be surprised if it comes back with herpes. 
If we have no peace, it is because we have forgotten that we belong to each other. 
The course of true love never did run smooth. 
I won't ever leave you, even though you're always leaving me. 
sometimes you don't need a goal in life, you don't need to know the big picture. you just need to know what you're going to do next! 
The world was collapsing, and the only thing that really mattered to me was that she was alive. 
I love you as certain dark things are loved, secretly, between the shadow and the soul. 
Romance is the glamour which turns the dust of everyday life into a golden haze. 
We are who we are, be­cause of those we choose to love and be­cause of those who love us. 
You have to kiss a lot of frogs before you find your prince 
When I look in the mirror, I know I’m looking at someone who isn’t sure she deserves to be loved at all. 
For where all love is, the speaking is unnecessary 
For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken. It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack. 
I bet you could sometimes find all the mysteries of the universe in someone's hand. 
If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he couldn't love as much in eighty years as I could in a day. 
Spending time with you showed me what I’ve been missing in my life. 
It is possible to be in love with you just because of who you are. 
More smiling, less worrying. More compassion, less judgment. More blessed, less stressed. More love, less hate. 
The human heart is a strange vessel. Love and hatred can exist side by side. 
The music in his laughter had a way of rounding off the missing notes in her soul. 
Each of us is born with a box of matches inside us but we can't strike them all by ourselves 
If only she could be so oblivious again, to feel such love without knowing it, mistaking it for laughter. 
love, I've come to understand is more than three words mumbled before bedtime. 
It's not how much we give but how much love we put into giving. 
Love is how you stay alive, even after you are gone. 
The highest function of love is that it makes the loved one a unique and irreplaceable being. 
I know enough to know that no woman should ever marry a man who hated his mother. 
Don't waste your love on somebody, who doesn't value it. 
I'd learned that some things are best kept secret. 
And next time you're planning to injure yourself to get me attention, just remember that a little sweet talk works wonders. 
The soul is healed by being with children. 
True love is not so much a matter of romance as it is a matter of anxious concern for the well-being of one's companion. 
I have feelings too. I am still human. All I want is to be loved, for myself and for my talent. 
Sometimes God allows what he hates to accomplish what he loves. 
Let yourself be drawn by the stronger pull of that which you truly love. 
Just because you're beautiful and perfect, it's made you conceited. 
That's what people do who love you. They put their arms around you and love you when you're not so lovable. 
It's hard being left behind. ( ) It's hard to be the one who stays. 
You are the one girl that made me risk eveything for a future worth having. 
Yours is the light by which my spirit's born: - you are my sun, my moon, and all my stars. 
Love is not the absence of logic but logic examined and recalculated heated and curved to fit inside the contours of the heart 
Love has nothing to do with what you are expecting to get - only with what you are expecting to give - which is everything 
Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow, That I shall say good night till it be morrow. 
When it's gone, you'll know what a gift love was. You'll suffer like this. So go back and fight to keep it. 
Romance is thinking about your significant other, when you are supposed to be thinking about something else. 
The heart is the toughest part of the body. Tenderness is in the hands. 
True love comes quietly, without banners or flashing lights. If you hear bells, get your ears checked. 
Moments, when lost, can't be found again. They're just gone. 
Why are old lovers able to become friends? Two reasons. They never truly loved each other, or they love each other still. 
I belong to my beloved, and my beloved is mine. 
Love is the extremely difficult realization that something other than oneself is real. 
Someday you'll find someone special again. People who've been in love once usually do. It's in their nature. 
Love, n. A temporary insanity curable by marriage. 
I wonder if fears ever really go away, or if they just lose their power over us. 
There is always something left to love. 
Love, it never dies. It never goes away, it never fades, so long as you hang on to it. Love can make you immortal 
We must love one another or die 
Trust no friend without faults, and love a woman, but no angel. 
Despite your best efforts, people are going to be hurt when it's time for them to be hurt. 
If a thing loves, it is infinite. 
Be the reason someone smiles. Be the reason someone feels loved and believes in the goodness in people. 
No woman wants to be in submission to a man who isn't in submission to God! 
There is nothing more truly artistic than to love people. 
It doesn't matter who you are or what you look like, so long as somebody loves you. 
Love is a better master than duty. 
The greatest happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved -- loved for ourselves, or rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
So it’s true, when all is said and done, grief is the price we pay for love. 
No matter how much you think you love somebody, you'll step back when the pool of their blood edges up too close. 
What greater gift than the love of a cat. 
He is beauty, inside and out. He is the silver lining in a world of darkness. He is my light. 
There's a difference between really loving someone and loving the idea of her. 
Goodbyes are only for those who love with their eyes. Because for those who love with heart and soul there is no such thing as separation. 
We are all worthy of one another. 
The fate of your heart is your choice and no one else gets a vote 
Lovers alone wear sunlight. 
Love cannot be reduced to a catalogue of reasons why, and a catalogue of reasons cannot be put together into love. 
Oh no. Don't smile. You'll kill me. I stop breathing when you smile. 
My great hope is to laugh as much as I cry; to get my work done and try to love somebody and have the courage to accept the love in return. 
Do I love you? My God, if your love were a grain of sand, mine would be a universe of beaches. 
The great tragedy of life is not that men perish, but that they cease to love. 
I think it is all a matter of love; the more you love a memory the stronger and stranger it becomes 
The scariest thing about distance is that you don’t know whether they’ll miss you or forget you. 
Nothing ever happens like you imagine it will 
I think we ought to live happily ever after. 
With him, life was routine; without him, life was unbearable. 
The day the power of love overrules the love of power, the world will know peace. 
The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only thing more impossible than staying was leaving. 
Love is a rebellious bird, that nobody can tame, and you call him quite in vain, if it suits him not to come. 
Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as my own: in pain and sickness it would still be dear. 
Anyone who loves in the expectation of being loved in return is wasting their time. 
I don’t know what they are called, the spaces between seconds– but I think of you always in those intervals. 
When you love someone, you say their name different. Like it's safe inside your mouth. 
You're like a song that I heard when I was a little kid but forgot I knew until I heard it again. 
Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them, humanity cannot survive. 
Wherever you will go, I will let you down, But this lullaby goes on. 
It’s dark now and I am very tired. I love you, always. Time is nothing. 
I have never found anybody who could stand to accept the daily demonstrative love I feel in me, and give back as good as I give. 
I'm not sure this is a world I belong in anymore. I'm not sure that I want to wake up. 
Heaven would never be heaven without you. 
I know my heart will never be the same But I'm telling myself I'll be okay 
I'm saying I'm in love with you! I've been in love with you this whole bleeding year! 
The moment you stop to think about whether you love someone, you've already stopped loving that person forever. 
I may not always be with you But when we're far apart Remember you will be with me Right inside my heart 
My mother she is beautiful, softened at the edges and tempered with a spine of steel. I want to grow old and be like her. 
[H]iding how you really feel and trying to make everyone happy doesn't make you nice, it just makes you a liar. 
The best things in life make you sweaty. 
Do what you love, love what you do, and with all your heart give yourself to it. 
Love recognizes no barriers. It jumps hurdles, leaps fences, penetrates walls to arrive at its destination full of hope. 
To fear love is to fear life, and those who fear life are already 3-parts dead. 
Parents were the only ones obligated to love you; from the rest of the world you had to earn it. 
Morning without you is a dwindled dawn. 
There ain't no way you can hold onto something that wants to go, you understand? You can only love what you got while you got it. 
Some people feel like they don't deserve love. They walk away quietly into empty spaces, trying to close the gaps of the past. 
Whenever you are confronted with an opponent. Conquer him with love. 
Those sweet lips. My, oh my, I could kiss those lips all night long. Good things come to those who wait. 
The Bible tells us to love our neighbors, and also to love our enemies; probably because generally they are the same people. 
When in a relationship, a real man doesn't make his woman jealous of others, he makes others jealous of his woman. 
You are my life now. 
The strongest love is the love that can demonstrate its fragility. 
Accept the things to which fate binds you, and love the people with whom fate brings you together,but do so with all your heart. 
Remember that the best relationship is one in which your love for each other exceeds your need for each other. 
It's the imperfections that make things beautiful 
When you have seen as much of life as I have, you will not underestimate the power of obsessive love. 
One day spent with someone you love can change everything. 
There is no love sincerer than the love of food. 
Love is like a brick. You can build a house, or you can sink a dead body. 
She wasn't doing a thing that I could see, except standing there leaning on the balcony railing, holding the universe together. 
I will not try to convince you to love me, to respect me, to commit to me. I deserve better than that; I AM BETTER THAN THAT Goodbye. 
The great thing to remember is that though our feelings come and go God's love for us does not. 
If you ever looked at me once with what I know is in you, I would be your slave. 
Keep your best wishes, close to your heart and watch what happens 
If you love a flower that lives on a star, it is sweet to look at the sky at night. All the stars are a-bloom with flowers 
Her heart was a secret garden and the walls were very high. 
I don't care what you say to me. I care what you share with me. 
I envy people that know love. That have someone who takes them as they are. 
I know you're tired but come, this is the way. 
The voice of Love seemed to call to me, but it was a wrong number. 
Love, the poet said, is woman's whole existence. 
If I love you, what business is it of yours? 
When you love someone you let them take care of you. 
He's not your prince charming if he doesn't make sure you know that you're his princess. 
nothing in this world was more difficult than love. 
Friends are the family you choose (~ Nin/Ithilnin, Elven rogue). 
I love you more than I think I should. 
All my heart is yours, sir: it belongs to you; and with you it would remain, were fate to exile the rest of me from your presence forever. 
Being with you and not being with you is the only way I have to measure time. 
She is a friend of my mind. She gather me, man. The pieces I am, she gather them and give them back to me in all the right order. 
Don't leave a piece of jewelry at his house so you can go back and get it later; he may be with his real girlfriend. 
I've always loved you, and when you love someone, you love the whole person, just as he or she is, and not as you would like them to be. 
There is love in holding and there is love in letting go. 
Why is love intensified by absence? 
A thousand half-loves must be forsaken to take one whole heart home. 
Love makes you want to be a better man—right, right. But maybe love, real love, also gives you permission to just be the man you are. 
The future for me is already a thing of the past - You were my first love and you will be my last 
How far should a person go in the name of true love? 
They do not love that do not show their love. 
The love that moves the sun and the other stars. 
One ought to hold on to one's heart; for if one lets it go, one soon loses control of the head too. 
I'm gonna fight for you, until your heart stops beating. 
If I know what love is, it is because of you. 
Ah, what happiness it is to be with people who are all happy, to press hands, press cheeks, smile into eyes. 
Though lovers be lost, love shall not; And death shall have no dominion. 
I want to try making things right because picking up the pieces is way better than leaving them the way they are. 
If I could but know his heart, everything would become easy. 
And all I loved, I loved alone. 
I'm a little pencil in the hand of a writing God, who is sending a love letter to the world. 
If I were a tree, I would have no reason to love a human. 
Moving on is easy. It's staying moved on that's trickier. 
The power of finding beauty in the humblest things makes home happy and life lovely. 
But if I hadn't fallen, I wouldn't have met you. 
Let me die the moment my love dies. Let me not outlive my own capacity to love. Let me die still loving, and so, never die. 
Loving someone and having them love you back is the most precious thing in the world. 
Forever and ever, kid, until you're sick and tired of seeing me. 
Love is a serious mental disease. 
Did I really want to stay on this road longer, knowing it was only going to end in devastation? 
If you don't receive love from the ones who are meant to love you, you will never stop looking for it. 
To love someone means to see them as God intended them. 
Don’t sacrifice yourself too much, because if you sacrifice too much there’s nothing else you can give and nobody will care for you. 
Where there is great love, there are always miracles. 
There are memories that time does not erase Forever does not make loss forgettable, only bearable. 
to love is to destroy, and that to be loved is to be the one destroyed. 
Love is our true destiny. We do not find the meaning of life by ourselves alone - we find it with another. 
Christian, you are the state lottery, the cure for cancer, and the three wishes from Aladdin's lamp all rolled into one 
The story of life is quicker than the wink of an eye, the story of love is hello and goodbye until we meet again 
I miss him in so many ways, but right now I miss him in the way you always miss someone when you're single among a room full of couples. 
Then love knew it was called love. And when I lifted my eyes to your name, suddenly your heart showed me my way 
I wish you could be kissed, Jane,' he said. 'Because I would beg just one off you. Under all this.' He flailed an arm toward the stars. 
One of the things that makes me who I am is the loyalty I have to people I hold close to my heart. 
When you forgive, you love. And when you love, God’s light shines upon you. 
A fit, healthy body—that is the best fashion statement 
Love is the strangest, most illogical thing in the world. 
Sometimes it takes a heartbreak to shake us awake & help us see we are worth so much more than we're settling for. 
Woman is sacred; the woman one loves is holy. 
They're in love. Fuck the war. 
True love is the best thing in the world, except for cough drops. 
I have seen the best of you, and the worst of you, and I choose both. 
Actually that’s my secret — I can’t even talk about you to anybody because I don’t want any more people to know how wonderful you are. 
You’re just another story I can’t tell anymore. 
You’ll never be able to find yourself if you’re lost in someone else. 
People should fall in love with their eyes closed. 
Do not swear by the moon, for she changes constantly. then your love would also change. 
How far would you go to keep the hope of love alive? 
My heart only ever had one thought, one want. One need. Despite all, in spite of all All my heart has ever wanted is you. 
Love is scary: it changes; it can go away. That's the part of the risk. I don't want to be scared anymore. 
Choose your love. Love your choice. 
The only creatures that are evolved enough to convey pure love are dogs and infants. 
And I wondered if love was too weak a word for what he felt, what he’d done for me. For what I felt for him. 
As lovers, the difference between men and women is that women can love all day long, but men only at times. 
Until one has loved an animal, a part of one's soul remains unawakened. 
Then I discovered that being related is no guarantee of love! 
It's the kind of kiss that inspires stars to climb into the sky and light up the world. 
There is nothing that is going to make people hate you more, and love you more, than telling the truth. 
some moments are nice, some are nicer, some are even worth writing about. 
There could have been no two hearts so open, no tastes so similar, no feelings so in unison 
The only love that I really believe in is a mother’s love for her children. 
If you truly want to be respected by people you love, you must prove to them that you can survive without them. 
My soul sees its equal in you. 
he came to think, It surprised him that strangers didn't stop each other on the street to say 
I felt like an animal, and animals don’t know sin, do they? 
You don’t take away my choices. You are my choice. 
Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this. 
I find the best way to love someone is not to change them, but instead, help them reveal the greatest version of themselves. 
I wish you to know that you have been the last dream of my soul. 
Of all our games, love's play is the only one which threatens to unsettle the soul 
This is what happened in love. One of you cried a lot and then both of you grew sarcastic. 
you're an expert at sorry and keeping the lines blurry 
True love begins when nothing is looked for in return. 
I will follow you to the ends of the world. 
I can't set my hopes too high, 'Cause every hello ends with a goodbye. 
If you love something so much let it go. If it comes back it was meant to be; if it doesn't it never was 
A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words become superfluous. 
When you love someone, its never over. You move on, because you have to but you take them with you in your heart 
I don't want to hurt you or anybody so please forget about me. Just try. Find yourself a better friend. 
I am certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of the Imagination. 
Limitless undying love which shines around me like a million suns it calls me on and on across the universe. 
Every woman wants a man who'll fall in love with her soul as well as her body. 
I love her, and that's the beginning and end of everything. 
I love you,’ he whispered, and kissed my brow. ‘Thorns and all. 
What about when someone doesn't need a shoulder? What if they need the arms? 
The saddest thing about love, Joe, is that not only the love cannot last forever, but even the heartbreak is soon forgotten. 
If I have learned anything in this long life of mine, it is this: in love we find out who we want to be; in war we find out who we are. 
With you, intimacy colours my voice. even ‘hello’ sounds like ‘come here'. 
And yet,to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. 
Dare to love yourself as if you were a rainbow with gold at both ends. 
I love you enough to never make you choose. 
Wait. You think I'm going to die? That's why you slept with me? 
To fall in love with God is the greatest romance; to seek him the greatest adventure; to find him, the greatest human achievement. 
He loved her, of course, but better than that, he chose her, day after day. Choice: that was the thing. 
So don't you worry your pretty little mind because people throw rocks at things that shine. [Ours] 
For it was not into my ear you whispered, but into my heart. It was not my lips you kissed, but my soul. 
When is a monster not a monster? Oh, when you love it. 
You may choose to look the other way but you can never say again that you did not know. 
Love meant jumping off a cliff and trusting that a certain person would be there to catch you at the bottom. 
Amor Fati – “Love Your Fate”, which is in fact your life. 
Would you destroy Something perfect in order to make it beautiful? 
Of course he loves me. I’m his sister.” “Blood isn’t love,” said Magnus, and his voice was bitter. 
Love one another, but make not a bond of love: Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls. 
Sometimes we love with nothing more than hope. Sometimes we cry with everything except tears. 
When you love someone, you don't have a choice. Love takes your choices away. - Clary Fray 
When he died, all things soft and beautiful and bright would be buried with him. 
Adam smiled cheerily. Ronan would start wars and burn cities for that true smile, elastic and amiable. 
We’d met at a carefree time, a moment full of promise, in its place now were the harsh lessons of the real world. 
You were you, and I was I; we were two before our time. I was yours before I knew, and you have always been mine too. 
Missing someone, they say, is self-centered. I self-center you more than ever. 
To the world you may be one person but to one person you may be the world. 
The way you walk, way you talk, way you say my name; it's beautiful, wonderful, don't you ever change. 
Until this moment, I had not realized that someone could break your heart twice, along the very same fault lines. 
If you could only love enough, you could be the most powerful person in the world. 
I drive around the streets an inch away from weeping, ashamed of my sentimentality and possible love. 
Don't ever think I fell for you, or fell over you. I didn't fall in love, I rose in it. 
Even on my weakest days I get a little bit stronger 
When people fall in love, they burst into flames. 
One should always be in love. That's the reason one should never marry. 
I don't care if you danced naked on the roof of the Little Palace with him. I love you, Alina, even the part of you that loved him. 
I didn't want to kiss you goodbye — that was the trouble — I wanted to kiss you good night — and there's a lot of difference. 
How could I have ever been ashamed of loving Dante Quintana? 
Neither love nor evil conquers all, but evil cheats more. 
Did you think you could stop me? I'll burn the world down to save her. 
A heart filled with anger has no room for love. 
There was beauty in the idea of freedom, but it was an illusion. Every human heart was chained by love. 
So I placed my heart under lock and key To take some time, and take care of me But I turn around and you're standing here 
Love is not a maybe thing, you know when you love someone. 
…There is the heat of Love, the pulsing rush of Longing, the lover’s whisper, irresistible—magic to make the sanest man go mad. 
Love wins, love always wins. 
I am no longer in love with her, that's certain, but maybe I love her. Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
When you love you wish to do things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve. 
Would he find her? Without question. Would he save her? Always. 
A man can be happy with any woman as long as he does not love her. 
If two people love each other there can be no happy end to it. 
Each time you happen to me all over again. 
Failed relationships can be described as so much wasted make-up. 
And I can fight only for something that I love, love only what I respect, and respect only what I at least know. 
You cannot be with someone just because you don’t want to hurt him. You have your own happiness to think about. 
I don't like it when I outweigh my men. 
Most of us must learn to love people and use things rather than loving things and using people. 
I'll find you. There is no place in this world you can hide from me. I'm watching. Love, Dimitri 
To love is to recognize yourself in another. 
The fact is…I’m in love with you, and I have been for some time. 
Last time I saw you, I said that it hurt too much to love you. But I was wrong about that. The truth is it hurts too much not to love you. 
Yes it wasn't over, it still isn't over. 
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man swear he loves me. 
You can live your whole life not realizing that what you're looking for is right in front of you. 
Oh, love isn't there to make us happy. I believe it exists to show us how much we can endure. 
A busy, vibrant, goal-oriented woman is so much more attractive than a woman who waits around for a man to validate her existence. 
You had to know a person well to make them laugh like that. 
And you can't love, not fully, unless you are loved in return. 
The truest form of love is how you behave toward someone, not how you feel about them. 
Ultimately, it is the desire, not the desired, that we love. 
I want you to be weak. As weak as I am. 
Love is worth everything. Everything. 
Then he made one last effort to search in his heart for the place where his affection had rotted away, and he could not find it. 
I love you more than I hate everything else. 
i am a museum full of art but you had your eyes shut 
I'm the kind of boy that can fall in love with any girl because I love with the heart, not the eyes. 
If having a soul means being able to feel love and loyalty and gratitude, then animals are better off than a lot of humans. 
Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. 
Just because I'm not forever by your side doesn't mean that's not precisely where I want to be. 
I threw myself into that fire, threw myself into it, into him, and let myself burn. 
Work without love is slavery. 
If a man hasn't what's necessary to make a woman love him, it's his fault, not hers. 
He was contemplation and enthusiasm. Ambition and strong coffee. I could have looked at him forever. 
Your naked body should only belong to those who fall in love with your naked soul. 
Love, when spelled backwards and read phonetically, reads evil 
And in the end, we were all just humans.. drunk on the idea that love, only love, could heal our brokenness. 
Love, like fire, goes out without fuel. 
The Simple Path Silence is Prayer Prayer is Faith Faith is Love Love is Service The Fruit of Service is Peace 
There can be no deep disappointment where there is not deep love. 
Statistically speaking, there is a 65 percent chance that the love of your life is having an affair. Be very suspicious. 
There comes a time in your life when you have to choose to turn the page, write another book or simply close it. 
Why is there ever this perverse cruelty in humankind, that makes us hurt most those we love best? 
She's my kitten, and no one else's. 
Now I'd rather be infected with love for the tiniest sliver of a second than live a hundred years smothered by a lie. 
You were the sun, and I was crashing into you. 
Love consists of not looking each other in the eye, but of looking outwardly in the same direction. 
Love is the strongest force the world possesses and yet it is the humblest imaginable. 
When you feel someone else's pain and joy as powerfully as if it were your own, then you know you really loved them. 
But you're the only one, Scarlet. You'll always be the only one. 
If you love deeply, you're going to get hurt badly. But it's still worth it. 
i carry your heart with me(i carry it in my heart) 
Love is always open arms. If you close your arms about love you will find that you are left holding only yourself. 
Often it is the most deserving people who cannot help loving those who destroy them. 
Love is a promise, love is a souvenir, once given never forgotten, never let it disappear. 
To love is to suffer and there can be no love otherwise. 
It is a defect of God's humor that he directs our hearts everywhere but to those who have a right to them. 
The minute I stopped trying to find the right girl, and started trying to become the right guy the girl came. 
Everybody is a main character to someone 
Every normal man must be tempted, at times, to spit on his hands, hoist the black flag, and begin slitting throats. 
We ate well and cheaply and drank well and cheaply and slept well and warm together and loved each other. 
I feel like a part of my soul has loved you since the beginning of everything. Maybe we’re from the same star. 
You will never be able to escape from your heart. So it's better to listen to what it has to say. 
Unrequited love is the infinite curse of a lonely heart. 
All of sudden, this shooting star went by, and all I could think was that they were listening to us somehow. 
Don't worry about hurting me, if that's what you're afraid of. I want to get hurt. At least I´ll feel something for a change. 
She had loved him for such a long time, she thought. How was it that she did now know him at all? 
You were the missing piece of my soul, the breath in my lungs, and the blood in my veins. 
This I want to believe implicitly: Man was born for love and revolution. 
Life is a gift. Don't forget to live it. 
I knew I loved you before I met you I think I dreamed you into life I knew I loved you before I met you I have been waiting all my life 
How can something so wrong feel so right? 
I have so much in me, and the feeling for her absorbs it all; I have so much, and without her it all comes to nothing. 
He loved her for almost everything she was & she decided that was enough to let him stay for a very long time. 
He looked so lost, so soulful, so lonely. I wanted him to kiss me now. I wanted to let him know I was his for all eternity. 
Surely it was a good way to die, in the place of someone else, someone I loved. 
There is no time for cut-and-dried monotony. There is time for work. And time for love. That leaves no other time. 
Only time can heal your broken heart. Just as only time can heal his broken arms and legs. 
What I cannot love, I overlook. 
Make me into anything, but just love me. 
Sometimes I feel like we're a knot, too tangled to be taken apart. 
No matter where it is in the sky No matter where you are in the world the moon is never bigger than your thumb. -John 
If you love me as you say you do,' she whispered, 'make it so that I am at peace. 
Autumn is the hardest season. The leaves are all falling, and they're falling like they're falling in love with the ground. 
If you cannot inspire a woman with love of you, fill her above the brim with love of herself ~ all that runs over will be yours. 
Would you mind repeating that? I'm afraid I might have lost my wits altogether and just hallucinated what I've longed to hear. 
You looove me. (holds out arms) You love me this much. 
The first time he'd held her hand, it felt so good that it crowded out all the bad things. It felt better than anything had ever hurt. 
Every time I think I'm missing a piece of me, you give it back. 
Let us always meet each other with smile, for the smile is the beginning of love. 
That's when you know for sure somebody loves you. They figure out what you need and they give it to you -- without you asking. 
Close your eyes and I'll kiss you, Tomorrow I'll miss you. 
A mighty pain to love it is, And 't is a pain that pain to miss; But of all pains, the greatest pain It is to love, but love in vain. 
When God knows you're ready for the responsibility of commitment, He'll reveal the right person under the right circumstances. 
They've got no idea what happiness is, they don't know that without this love there is no happiness or unhappiness for us--there is no life. 
Being in love, I find myself smiling for no reason at all 
If you love someone but rarely make yourself available to him or her, that is not true love. 
These pictures are my heart. And if my heart was a canvas, every square inch of it would be painted over with you. 
Love is too precious to be ashamed of. 
We come to love not by finding a perfect person, but by learning to see an imperfect person perfectly. 
Who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make love known? 
For women, the best aphrodisiacs are words. The G-spot is in the ears. He who looks for it below there is wasting his time. 
Loving someone is giving them the power to break your heart, but trusting them not to. 
Love is a striking example of how little reality means to us. 
She's mad, but she's magic. There's no lie in her fire. 
The heart can think of no devotion Greater than being shore to the ocean- Holding the curve of one position, Counting an endless repetition. 
If you love someone, you must be prepared to set them free. 
Hope for love, pray for love, wish for love, dream for love…but don’t put your life on hold waiting for love. 
The more boys I meet the more I love my dog. 
Love cannot be forced, love cannot be coaxed and teased. It comes out of heaven, unasked and unsought. 
Absence makes the heart grow fonder, but it sure makes the rest of you lonely. 
I think you're still the only person sharp enough to sharpen someone like me. 
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. O, that I were a glove upon that hand That I might touch that cheek! 
I mean, it's not surprising, really. Once you love something, you always love it in some way. You have to. It's, like, part of you for good. 
In all the world, there is no heart for me like yours. In all the world, there is no love for you like mine. 
He was the toast to her butter. 
Like some wines our love could neither mature nor travel. 
Plant seeds of happiness, hope, success, and love; it will all come back to you in abundance. This is the law of nature. 
and when all the wars are over, a butterfly will still be beautiful. 
I don't remember who said this, but there really are places in the heart you don't even know exist until you love a child. 
Love is not a habit, a commitment, or a debt. It isn't what romantic songs tell us it is - love simply is. 
Tears are words the heart can't express 
My head’ll explode if I continue with this escapism. 
I think you can only be truly mad at someone you really love. 
The words ‘I Love You’ kill, and resurrect millions, in less than a second. 
If you aren't the woman I think you are, then this isn't the world I thought it was. 
Wanting him to come back before anyone notices part of the world has not moved since he left. 
Those whom we most love are often the most alien to us. 
I don't understand the point of being together if you're not the happiest. 
Love is illogical, love had consequences--I did this to myself, and I should be able to take it. 
Sometimes two people have to fall apart, to realize how much they need to fall back together. 
You who suffer because you love, love still more. To die of love, is to live by it. 
I got my heart's desire, and there my troubles began. 
Every life has one true love snapshot. 
Sweets to the sweet. 
Never forget that justice is what love looks like in public. 
Love God and He will enable you to love others even when they disappoint you. 
Absence is to love what wind is to fire; it extinguishes the small, it inflames the great. 
Someone once wrote that a novel should deliver a series of small astonishments. I get the same thing spending an hour with you. 
You can love a person dear to you with a human love, but an enemy can only be loved with divine love. 
I imagine a line, a white line, painted on the sand and on the ocean, from me to you. 
Even when I'm dead, I'll swim through the Earth, like a mermaid of the soil, just to be next to your bones. 
Know that love is truly timeless. 
Freely we serve Because we freely love, as in our will To love or not; in this we stand or fall. 
The opposite of love is not hate, its apathy, when you simply don't bother about that person! 
That night when you kissed me, I left a poem in your mouth, and you can hear some of the lines every time you breathe out. 
Relationships are all about trust and equality. If one person shares, then the other person should share, too. 
Where you go, I shall go; where you die, I shall die, and there will I be buried. 
Love who you love while you have them. That's all you can do. Let them go when you must. If you know how to love, you'll never run out. 
Love's gift cannot be given, it waits to be accepted. 
Love makes us such fools. 
Why, darling, I don't live at all when I'm not with you. 
Hate is It's too easy. Love. Love takes courage. 
A friend of mine once defined love as finding someone you can talk to late into the night 
I have always found that actively loving saves one from a morbid preoccupation with the shortcomings of society. 
We're all golden sunflowers inside. 
What do I care how 'e looks? I am good-looking enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show is zat my husband is brave! 
Love is like breathing. You take it in and let it out. 
Love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared to love in dreams. 
A woman should soften but not weaken a man. 
Two things you will never have to chase: True friends & true love. 
When it comes to men, deal with them as they are, not how you’d like them to be. 
A weed is but an unloved flower. 
Those we love never truly leave us, Harry. There are things that death cannot touch. 
Nobody ever gets what they want when it comes to love. 
I'm guilty of giving people more chances than they deserve but when I'm done, I'm done. 
After all, my erstwhile dear, My no longer cherished, Need we say it was not love, Just because it perished? 
But the you who you are tonight is the same you I was in love with yesterday, the same you I’ll be in love with tomorrow. 
And yet another moral occurs to me now: Make love when you can. It's good for you. 
Your kids require you most of all to love them for who they are, not to spend your whole time trying to correct them. 
It’s strange how dreams get under your skin and give your heart a test for what’s real and what’s imaginary. 
Cut the ending. Revise the script. The man of her dreams is a girl. 
Do you really think anyone in this world, compares to you in my eyes? 
It is better to lose your pride with someone you love rather than to lose that someone you love with your useless pride. 
I do love nothing in the world so well as you- is not that strange? 
Submission is not about authority and it is not obedience; it is all about relationships of love and respect. 
You are the most important thing to me now. The most important thing to me ever. 
Would you rather live one perfect day over and over or live your life with no perfect days but just decent ones? 
Stronger than lover's love is lover's hate. Incurable, in each, the wounds they make. 
It ought to make us feel ashamed when we talk like we know what we're talking about when we talk about love. 
I love you because no two snowflakes are alike, and it is possible, if you stand tippy-toe, to walk between the raindrops. 
I don't want to be somebody's crush. If somebody likes me, I want them to like the real me, not what they think I am. 
If equal affection cannot be, Let the more loving one be me. 
It's so much easier to convince yourself you're madly in love with someone when you know nothing about him. 
Five minutes are enough to dream a whole life, that is how relative time is. 
How could I be sleeping with this particular man . Surely only true love could justify my lack of taste. 
twice I have lived forever in a smile 
It was the nicest thing she could imagine. It made her want to have his babies and give him both of her kidneys. 
When you like someone, you like them in spite of their faults. When you love someone, you love them with their faults. 
Heart, we will forget him, You and I, tonight! You must forget the warmth he gave, I will forget the light. 
I'm backing down now. I really do love you. That's why I'm doing this. 
People wait around too long for love. I'm happy with all of my lusts! 
You honestly expect me to breathe in a world without air? 
It hurts to breathe. It hurts to live. I hate her, yet I do not think I can exist without her. 
We are not people who touch each other carelessly; every point of contact between us feels important, a rush of energy and relief. 
Kiss a lover, Dance a measure, Find your name And buried treasure. Face your life, It's pain, It's pleasure, Leave no path untaken. 
You get use to someone—start to like them, even—and they leave. In the end, everyone leaves. 
A kiss on the beach when there is a full moon is the closest thing to heaven. 
Deep in her heart, she wasn't sure she deserved to be happy, nor did she believe that she was worthy of someone who seemed normal. 
What if love wasn't the act of finding what you were missing but the give-and-take that made you both match? 
It's one thing to fall in love. It's another to feel someone else fall in love with you, and to feel a responsibility toward that love. 
I love you, in my mind where my thoughts reside, in my heart where my emotions live, and in my soul where my dreams are born. I love you. 
When someone blushes, doesn't that mean 'yes'? 
I don't think you can define love. 
My girlfriend is sad and quiet and keeps me up all night worrying about her. 
It's hard to love a woman and do anything. 
I'm sorry. I know you loved her. It was hard not to. 
This time I wouldn't forget him, because I couldn't ever forgive him - for breaking my heart twice. 
Well my music was different in high school; I was singing about love—you know, things I don't care about anymore. 
I crossed a thousand leagues to come to you, and lost the best part of me along the way. Don't tell me to leave. 
I want someone whose heart is big enough to hold me. 
Physical love is unthinkable without violence. 
If a writer falls in love with you, you can never die. 
I love you so much that nothing can matter to me - not even you Only my love- not your answer. Not even your indifference 
I never want to be away from you again, except at work, in the restroom or when one of us is at a movie the other does not want to see. 
The problem with marriage is that it ends every night after making love, and it must be rebuilt every morning before breakfast. 
If you have the woman you love, what more do you need? Well, besides an alibi for the time of her husband’s murder. 
There will never be no love at all. 
Love is honesty. Love is a mutual respect for one another. 
I have been loving you a little more every minute since this morning. 
You're like a grey sky. You're beautiful, even though you don't want to be. 
You know that when I hate you, it is because I love you to a point of passion that unhinges my soul. 
I believe in love the verb, not the noun. 
There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart. 
He offered her the world. She said she had her own. 
I love you and it's getting worse. 
She did not believe he could have really gone, because for her, to leave the person you loved was impossible. 
The center hold.” “How do you know?” “Because we are the center. 
The right thing at the wrong tme is the wrong thing. 
I don't let nobody see me wishin' he was mine 
Love is a rebellious bird that nobody can tame. 
A best friend is the only one that walks into your life when the world has walked out. 
Those who really love you don't mean to hurt you and if they do, you can't see it in their eyes but it hurts them too. 
People die, I think, but your relationship with them doesn't. It continues and is ever-changing. 
As the light begins to intensify, so does my misery, and I wonder how it is possible to hurt so much when nothing is wrong. 
We are not held back by the love we didn't receive in the past, but by the love we're not extending in the present. 
I'm in love with you, and I'm not in the business of denying myself the simple pleasure of saying true things. 
I need the thing that happens when your brain shuts off and your heart turns on. 
Love is a snowmobile racing across the tundra and then suddenly it flips over, pinning you underneath. At night, the ice weasels come. 
You say you’re ? Sure that you’re in love? How can you know it? You think love is so simple? 
Don't marry a rich man. Marry a good man. He will spend his life trying to keep you happy. No rich man can buy that! 
When you know my love, my love will warm you. 
Love is—a shade of what I feel. 
What if I were smiling and running into your arms? Would you see then what I see now? 
A warrior does not give up what he loves, he finds the love in what he does 
If you have it [love], you don't need to have anything else, and if you don't have it, it doesn't matter much what else you have. 
Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy to a friend. 
Remember. The way you make love is the way God will be with you. 
Every day People straighten up the hair, why not the heart? 
I couldn't stand here, hanging on, when the very thing I held disappeared more with each passing day. 
Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my folly. 
The Heart wants what it wants - or else it does not care 
Wisdom is knowing I am nothing, Love is knowing I am everything, and between the two my life moves. 
Hatred would have been easier. With hatred, I would have known what to do. Hatred is clear, metallic, one-handed, unwavering; unlike love. 
It shattered something inside me that hadn't been broken before. 
A truth should exist, it should not be used like this. If I love you is that a fact or a weapon? 
A man in love can do extraordinary things, I don’t care if you’re an angel, you’re my angel, and I won’t let you go. 
You have my whole heart. You always did. 
Love is a possible strength in an actual weakness. 
Why are they all high-calorie foods? 
I believe in the immeasurable power of love; that true love can endure any circumstance and reach across any distance. 
That’s love: Two lonely persons keep each other safe and touch each other and talk to each other. 
Yearning for love made her feel like a cat that was always twining around ankles, meowing 
And I'm dying to know, is it killing you like it's killing me? And the story of us looks a lot like a tragedy now. 
They are orphans again, with no true home but each other and whatever life they can make together on the other side of the sea. 
One of the best times for figuring out who you are & what you really want out of life? Right after a break-up. 
Men build too many walls and not enough bridges. 
If love is blind, then maybe a blind person that loves has a greater understanding of it. 
I wanted to be his life preserver, the thing that would keep him afloat. Instead, he became my anchor. And I’m tired of drowning. 
The truth was, he now belonged only to my past, and it was time I begin to accept it, as much as it hurt to do so. 
I just looked at her, feeling utterly empty. I didn’t know what I was supposed to say to her. 
When you fish for love, bait with your heart, not your brain. 
He was too perfect, despite being one of the most imperfect people I knew. 
I would lay down everything I possess, even my soul, for you. If that isn't love, it's the best I have. 
She was the kind of girlfriend God gives you young, so you'll know loss the rest of your life. 
If it weren't for music, I would think that love is mortal. 
Just because love don't look the way you think it should, don't mean you don't have it. 
But why, why, why can't people just say what they mean? 
Perfect love is the most beautiful of all frustrations because it is more than one can express. 
I cannot compromise my respect for your love. You can keep your love, I will keep my respect. 
Before I fell in love with words, with setting skies and singing birds— it was you I fell in love with first. 
This thing about you that you think is your flaw - it's the reason I'm falling in love with you. 
Love takes off the masks we fear we cannot live without and know we cannot live within. 
And the story of love is a long sad tale ending in graves. 
Sometimes good things fall apart, so better things can fall together. 
God turns you from one feeling to another and teaches by means of opposites so that you will have two wings to fly, not one 
You might be looking for reasons but there are no reasons. 
People do the damndest things when they’re in love. 
Whoever loves becomes humble. Those who love have , so to speak , pawned a part of their narcissism. 
Ever since time began, people have recognized their true Love by the light in their eyes. 
Love is the most powerful force in the world. That love can do anything. 
True beauty is something that attacks, overpowers, robs, and finally destroys. 
Can't you see? Every step I have taken, since I was that child on the bridge, has been to bring myself closer to you. 
Don't be reckless with other people's hearts. Don't put up with people who are reckless with yours. 
What is love? two souls and one flesh; friendship? two bodies and one soul. 
He was afraid of defiling the love which filled his soul. 
Nothing else wounds so deeply and irreparably. Nothing else robs us of hope so much as being unloved by one we love 
Looking at beauty in the world, is the first step of purifying the mind. 
My shoulder will never be the same. I expect you to nurse me back to health. 
And if you couldn't be loved, the next best thing was to be let alone. 
How could you go about choosing something that would hold the half of your heart you had to bury? 
Love is hard to find, hard to keep, and hard to forget. 
Define yourself radically as one beloved by God. This is the true self. Every other identity is illusion. 
He is ugly and sad but he is all love. 
The first stab of love is like a sunset, a blaze of color -- oranges, pearly pinks, vibrant purples 
We are asleep until we fall in Love! 
Learn to deal with the fact that you are not a perfect person but you are a person that deserves respect and honesty. 
Love those you hate you. 
If I had a camera,' I said, 'I'd take a picture of you every day. That way I'd remember how you looked every single day of your life. 
The only way of knowing a person is to love them without hope. 
Better than chocolate, being with you last night. Silly me, I thought that nothing was better than chocolate. 
Living simply makes loving simple. 
Love is a state in which a man sees things most decidedly as they are not. 
Love is so unpredictable. That's what makes it so great. 
Love the trees until their leaves fall off, then encourage them to try again next year. 
Physics isn't the most important thing. Love is. 
No matter what, nobody can take away the dances you've already had. 
Your absence has not taught me to be alone, it merely has shown that when together we cast a single shadow on the wall. 
And Max, the king of all wild things, was lonely and wanted to be where someone loved him best of all. 
Why is the measure of love loss? 
Who said I can't wear my Converse With my dress, well baby That's just me! 
I believe that every single event in life happens in an opportunity to choose love over fear. 
Be worthy love, and love will come. 
I am two fools, I know, For loving, and for saying so. 
You are my butterfly and refuse to set you free. 
My love is pizza shaped. Won’t you have a slice? It’s circular, so there’s enough to go around. 
love is the sum of our choices, the strength of our commitments, the ties that bind us together. 
In love, one and one are one. 
I come here with no expectations, only to profess, now that I am at liberty to do so, that my heart is and always will be yours. 
For she had eyes and chose me. 
None of us can choose where we shall love 
Tell me then, does love make one a fool or do only fools fall in love? 
Remembering. Forgetting. I'm not sure which is worse. 
Right now we are here, and nothing can mar our perfection, or steal the joy of this perfect moment. 
Loving's pretty easy. It's letting someone love you that's hard. 
No man is offended by another man's admiration of the woman he loves; it is the woman only who can make it a torment. 
They said that love was terrifying and tender, wild and sweet, and none of it made any sense. But now I knew that every mad word was true. 
Friendship is selfless love, care, respect, and honor not a profitable opportunity. 
I'd rather die on my own terms than live on theirs. I'd rather die loving Alex than live without him. 
But everyone disappears, no matter who loves them. 
Fight for the only thing she knew was good enough, noble enough, powerful enough to be worth risking everything Love. 
The most confused you will ever get is when you try to convince your heart and spirit of something your mind knows is a lie. 
You are protected, in short, by your ability to love! 
Hearts Live By Being Wounded 
He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he ended and she began. 
The more you are motivated by Love, The more Fearless & Free your action will be. 
The language of love letters is the same as suicide notes. 
Love is illogical. You fall into it like a manhole. Then you're just stuck. You die in love more than you live in love. 
Nothing in life is worth, turning your back on, if you love it. 
Eternity is in love with the productions of time. 
Almost all the time, you tell yourself you're loving somebody when you're just using them. This only looks like love. 
Love as thou wilt 
I haven't had that one great love, which is good. I don't want that to be in the past, I want it to be in the future. 
Love simply is. 
Can't you just like a girl who likes you back?' 'None of them likes me back. I may as well like the one I really want. 
Love is not blind; that is the last thing that it is. Love is bound; and the more it is bound the less it is blind. 
Their fingers seemed to fit together in just the right way- effortlessly clasped,like perfect complements. 
But, my God, it's so beautiful when the boy smiles 
And maybe that was love. Being so vulnerable and allowing someone else in so far they could hurt you, but they also give you everything. 
You can never be wise and be in love at the same time. 
I love you, Marks. My heart is completely and utterly yours. And unfortunately for you, the rest of me comes with it. 
Love: the sickest of Irony’s sick jokes. The place where logic and order go to die. 
But whatever However Whenever this ends I want you to know That right now I love you forever 
I feel like I’ve been split open and stuffed with sunshine. 
There are some experiences in life they haven't invented the right words for. 
I’m a fake fact factory. The things I make are the things I make up. Also, as a side business, I make love. Actually, I just made that up. 
Truth without love is brutality, and love without truth is hypocrisy. 
I had to touch you with my hands, I had to taste you with my tongue; one can't love and do nothing. 
Sometimes I get real lonely sleeping with you. 
Our love was a two-person game. At least until one of us died, and the other became a murderer. 
She was bendable light: she shone around every corner of my day. 
What's your heart telling you to do? I don't know.' Maybe, you're trying too hard to hear it. 
But hurry, let's entwine ourselves as one, our mouth broken, our soul bitten by love, so time discovers us safely destroyed. 
All the problem of women, starts with men. All the problem of men, ends with women. 
Nothing had changed. I was the stupid one again. I was the girl who never understood who she was to people. 
One's life has value so long as one attributes value to the life of others, by means of love, friendship, and compassion 
Soul meets soul on lovers lips. 
Love is not finding someone to live with. It's finding someone you can't live without. 
Zen masters say you cannot see your reflection in running water, only in still water. 
Find the things that matter, and hold on to them, and fight for them, and refuse to let them go. 
You know that I could as soon forget you as my existence! 
We all have an old knot in the heart we wish to untie. 
I make love with a focus and intensity that most people reserve for sleep. 
Westley: This is true love — you think this happens every day? 
Love may forgive all infirmities and love still in spite of them: but Love cannot cease to will their removal. 
Love is a drama of contradictions. 
He experienced the singular pleasure of watching people he loved fall in love with other people he loved. 
Friendship often ends in love. But love in friendship; never. 
Love is just a word until someone comes along and gives it meaning. 
The greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and be loved in return. 
Everything I know, I know because of love. 
You smiled and talked to me of nothing and I felt that for this I had been waiting long. 
The thing with your heart's desire is that your heart doesn't even know what it desires until it turns up. 
If we’re going to kiss, it has to be book-worthy. 
One rarely falls in love without being as much attracted to what is interestingly wrong with someone as what is objectively healthy. 
Real friendship or love is not manufactured or achieved by an act of will or intention. Friendship is always an act of recognition. 
For which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me? 
The worst thing you can do if you miss or need someone is let them know it. 
They say: 'If a man knew himself, he would know all mankind.' I say: 'If a man loved mankind, he would know something of himself. 
I think Heaven will be like a first kiss. 
Love comes with a knife, not some shy question, and not with fears for its reputation! 
Love is an endless mystery, because there is no reasonable cause that could explain it. 
People who love themselves, don’t hurt other people. The more we hate ourselves, the more we want others to suffer. 
Love is a trap. When it appears, we see only its light, not its shadows. 
Love! Love until the night collapses! 
The moment our lips met, I knew with pure and piercing certainty that I would have waited for him forever. 
Dexter, I love you so much. So, so much, and I probably always will. I just don't like you anymore. I'm sorry. 
You can’t leave yet. I’m not finished falling in love with you. 
It’s hard to communicate anything exactly and that’s why perfect relationships between people are difficult to find. 
It takes great courage to see the world in all its tainted glory, and still to love it. And even more courage to see it in the one you love 
Love lasts about seven years. That's how long it takes for the cells of the body to totally replace themselves. 
We wanted the freedom to love. We wanted the freedom to choose. Now we have to fight for it. 
She put one hand on mine. “When someone is in your heart, they’re never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
Stains are even worse when you're the only one who can see them. 
You had to be willing to fight in order for a love story to last a life time. 
If I had a single flower for every time I think about you, I could walk forever in my garden. 
Love is when the other person's happiness is more important than your own. 
When you leave, weary of me, without a word I shall gently let you go. 
No matter how bad your heart is broken, the world doesn't stop for your grief. 
It's usually the selfish people who are loved the most. They do what you deny yourself, and you love them for it. You give them your heart. 
I didn't know love could leave the lights on all the time. 
Everyone's a little crazy. Some people just hide it better than others. 
May you live as long as you wish and love as long as you live. 
That kind of love should've been able to beat sickness. That kind of love should've conquered anything. 
True love is born from understanding. 
If you didn't remember something happening, was it because it never had happened? Or because you wished it hadn't? 
I will be with her again, or I will die. There aren’t any other options 
Take my hand and we'll make it - I swear 
She asked if I loved another woman, so I answered honestly and said, “Dinner was great, but I could go for dessert. 
some people fall in love over and over again while some people can only do it once. 
I'm beginning to think that maybe it's not just how much you love someone. Maybe what matters is who you are when you're with them. 
No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight. 
Self-talk reflects your innermost feelings. 
If you press me to say why I loved him, I can say no more than because he was he, and I was I. 
Real museums are places where Time is transformed into Space. 
The question, love, is whether you want me enough to take the risk. 
In the absence of love, we began slowly but surely to fall apart. 
But you cant shut everyone out. I mean you have to have someone to lovesomeone to hold on to someone-- 
How 'bout a shot of truth in that denial cocktail. 
I hold it true, whate'er befall; I feel it when I sorrow most; 'Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
And I didn't choose it, Kat. I chose you. 
My love is meatloaf flavored. I just wish my meatloaf was also meatloaf flavored. 
Do not allow me to forget you 
If I could bronze my love, it’d be worthy of a silver medal. 
He brought out the worst in me, and was the best thing that ever happened to me. 
Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. 
Maybe you could be mine / or maybe we’ll be entwined / aimless in this sexless foreplay. 
If you love me, Henry, you don’t love me in a way I understand. 
Love comforteth like sunshine after rain. 
I might kiss you. I might be bad at it. That's not possible. 
If I were rain, That joins sky and earth that otherwise never touch, Could I join two hearts as well? 
We live in a dark and romantic and quite tragic world. 
Happiness is part of who we are. Joy is the feeling 
I'm like a starving man who has been given food. Maybe he's cold, and his clothes are torn, and he's ashamed, but he's not unhappy. 
Everything that happens to you matters to me. 
In a universe of ambiguity, this kind of certainty comes only once, and never again, no matter how many lifetimes you live. 
Gamble everything for love, if you're a true human being. 
Nobody knows you. You don't know yourself. And I, who am half in love with you, What am I in love with? My own imaginings? 
You can be in love and you can be in a relationship. But they’re not always the same thing. 
I could’ve sworn I was telling the truth when I told you I didn’t miss you. 
When we are in love, we are convinced nobody else will do. But as time goes, others do do, and often do do, much much better. 
I know I’m not supposed to say this, but I love you. 
The heart of man is very much like the sea, it has its storms, it has its tides and in its depths it has its pearls too 
I was his exception, and as much as I had tried to fight my feelings, he was mine. 
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood. 
Two minds with but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one. 
Love is like a virus. It can happen to anybody at any time. 
That this girl would know exactly how to shatter me. 
I once loved a girl who almost loved me, but not as much as she loved John Cusack. 
I like being the girl nobody can have. 
A man is lucky if he is the first love of a woman. A woman is lucky if she is the last love of a man. 
Perhaps watching someone you love suffer can teach you even more than suffering yourself can. 
Every life needs a little space. It leaves room for good things to enter it. 
A real relationship is two-way. 
If love is like a possession, maybe my letter are like my exorcisms 
Loving someone always requires you to not love others. 
It is very difficult to live among people you love and hold back from offering them advice. 
When male authors write love stories, the heroine tends to end up dead. 
Emotion without reason lets people walk all over you; reason without emotion is a mask for cruelty. 
You might as well make yourself fly as to make yourself love. 
You don't need to justify your love, you don't need to explain your love, you just need to practice your love. Practice creates the master. 
Everything is clearer when you're in love. 
Love is a combination of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect and trust. 
There's only one thing that can heal the heart Only one It's love, Gaara. 
Love only grows by sharing. You can only have more for yourself by giving it away to others. 
But you've slipped under my skin, invaded my blood and seized my heart. 
how sad and bad and mad it was - but then, how it was sweet 
Love is keeping the promise anyway. 
If music be the food of love, play on. 
I haven’t been very impressed lately. By people, or places, or the way someone said he loved me and then slowly changed his mind. 
You stay safe, You love. You survive. You laugh and cry and struggle and sometimes you fail and sometimes you succeed. You Push. 
People Die Beauty Fades Love Changes And You Will Always Be Alone 
I love you, even if there isn’t any me, or any love, or even any life. I love you. 
about her has to do with me. 
To wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect 
But you're so busy changing the world Just one smile can change all of mine 
For love is no part of the dreamworld. Love belongs to Desire, and Desire is always cruel. 
I want him to see the flowers in my eyes and hear the songs in my hands. 
Only in the agony of parting do we look into the depths of love. 
You're my Star, a stargazer too, and I wish that I were Heaven, with a billion eyes to look at you! 
Isn't hate merely the result of wounded love? 
Is it possible not to ever know your type-not to even know you have a type-until quite suddenly you do? 
I love you not only for what you are, but for what I am when I am with you 
We should love, not fall in love, because everything that falls, gets broken. 
The best use of life is love. The best expression of love is time. The best time to love is now. 
You are what happiness means to me. And I would rather have today with you than forever with anyone else. 
Why did he have to be so gorgeous? Why did he have to stand so close, and why did I still love him so much? 
You have to be very fond of men. Very, very fond. You have to be very fond of them to love them. Otherwise they're simply unbearable. 
To love is easy, to be in a relationship is extremely difficult. 
There is love of course. And then there's life, its enemy. 
You know what the secret is? It's so simple. We love one another. We're nice to one another. Do you know how rare that is? - Carmen 
I really don't even know you, and yet, in my life, you are forever entangled; to my history, inextricably bound. 
When you love you should not think you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
Maybe sometimes we can only see the truth about ourselves if someone shows us where to look. 
Every time I close my eyes, it's like a dark paradise. No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight 
The heart is a strange beast and not ruled by logic. 
No matter how much you love someone, you still want to have you own way. 
I feel…and I have reason to believe…that we could come to mean something to each other. 
Have you ever felt the longing for someone you could admire? For something, not to look down at, but up to? 
What barrier is there that love cannot break? 
You don’t need scores of suitors. You need only one… if he’s the right one. 
But what can be done, the one who loves must share the fate of the one he loves. 
Get up, Shahrzad al-Khayzuran. You kneel before no one. Least of all me. 
Say it,” I gritted out. “The High Lord of the Night Court is your mate. 
She let out a laugh, and then she put her hand over her mouth, like she was angry at herself for forgetting her sadness. 
Often you don't know whether a woman is friend, enemy or lover until it is too late. Sometimes, she is all three. 
Love without sacrifice is like theft 
To make one person the center of your world is bound to end in disaster. There are too many factors outside your control. 
When all is said and done, the weather and love are the two elements about which one can never be sure. 
What sexual preference do you hope she has?” “Happiness.” Isnt that cool? 
Tucker: Why would you tell me now if it's against the rules? Clara: Because I love you. 
Are those the only options? Nothing or forever? 
If a man whistles at you, don't turn around. You are a lady not a dog. 
I will find you. In the farthest corner, I will find you. 
And we all know love is a glass which makes even a monster appear fascinating. 
From the stars, to the stars. 
People who meet in airports are seventy-two percent more likely to fall for each other than people who meet anywhere else. 
I'm telling you this for one reason and one reason only: No matter how sure you are of someone's love, it's always nice to hear it. 
I miss you. I miss you. I miss you, I miss you. Be ready, because when I see you, I'll never let you go again. 
Love makes the world go round? Not at all. Whiskey makes it go round twice as fast. 
Everyone has choices to make; no one has the right to take those choices away from us. Not even out of love.. 
Right now, it's hard to imagine that it is raining anywhere in the world. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
Because love, love is never finished. It circles and circles, the memories out of order and not always complete. 
Love fades. Mine has. 
What does the brain matter compared with the heart? 
This is how the girl who couldn't speak and the man who couldn't see fell in love. 
Just for the record, she still loves you. She wouldn't bother to torture you if she didn't. 
You can love somebody without it being like that. You keep them a stranger, a stranger who's a friend. 
God's definition of what matters is pretty straightforward. He measures our lives by how we love. 
Love is like quicksilver in the hand. Leave the fingers open and it stays. Clutch it and it darts away. 
when you decide you want to be with someone forever, you want forever to start right now. 
The purpose of relationship is not to have another who might complete you, but to have another with whom you might share your completeness. 
There was nowhere I could go that wouldn't be you. 
Loving you forever can't be wrong. Even though you're not here, can't move on 
Love is like a good cake; you never know when it's coming, but you'd better eat it when it does! 
To find out if she really loved me, I hooked her up to a lie detector. And just as I suspected, my machine was broken. 
When I like people immensely I never tell their names to anyone. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. 
I loved him as we always love for the first time; with idolatry and wild passion. 
Her existence alone was excuse enough to justify the creation of the entire world. 
The most introspective of souls are often those that have been hurt the most. 
You said move on, where do I go? 
I'll come and make love to you at five o'clock. If I'm late start without me. 
The knowledge that she would never be loved in return acted upon her ideas as a tide acts upon cliffs. 
I saw the world from the stars' point of view, and it looked unbearably lonely. 
I don't want to live, I want to love first and live incidentally. 
I gave you my heart, but it wasn't enough. 
Do people always fall in love with things they can't have?' 'Always,' Carol said, smiling, too. 
You know someone's right for you when the things they don't to say are even more important than the things they do. 
Love cannot live where there is no trust. 
the world is not a pleasant place to be without someone to hold and be held by. 
Thank you for gracing my life with your lovely presence, for adding the sweet measure of your soul to my existence. 
I realized I’m in love. It's always been right in front of me. 
You can give without loving, but you cannot love without giving. 
My father gave me the greatest gift anyone could give another person, he believed in me. 
Without love we all like birds with broken wings. 
Everything want to be loved. Us sing and dance and holler, just trying to be loved. 
The bottom line is that we never fall for the person we're supposed to. 
I’ve been working hard to become the kind of man she needs, the kind of man she already believes me to be. 
Sometimes, remembering hurts too much. 
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a great triumph over Christianity. 
All any of us wanted, really, was to know that we counted. That someone else's life would not have been as rich without us here. 
When someone beats a rug, the blows are not against the rug, but against the dust in it. 
Does that count as an argument? Can we kiss and make up now? 
By night, Love, tie your heart to mine, and the two together in their sleep will defeat the darkness 
It never gets easier, missing you. And sometimes I wonder if it ever will. 
What we all want, really, is to be loved. That craving drives our worst behavior. 
Love, and you shall be loved. 
Love is not something you protect. It’s something you risk. 
If in thirst you drink water from a cup, you see God in it. Those who are not in love with God will see only their own faces in it. 
Choice or no, my heart is his. 
Love was the most savage monster of all. 
I look at you, and I think about you, and I don't know. No one has ever confounded me the way you do. 
It hurts to love. It's like giving yourself to be flayed and knowing that at any moment the other person may just walk off with your skin. 
You two go ahead and make out–I'll just sit here and bleed quietly. 
I reserve the right to love many different people at once, and to change my prince often. 
The opposite of love is not hate. It is indifference. 
Not like this. He wanted it to be real. 
It's easy to cry when you realize that everyone you love will reject you or die. 
If you listen to the wind very carefully, you'll be able to hear me whisper my love for you. 
The fiercest anger of all, the most incurable, Is that which rages in the place of dearest love. 
A man always finds it hard to realize that he may have finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may have treated her. 
Some people feel love in their hearts, Julie. Some of us feel it all way into our souls. We're the ones who can't forget. 
I just don't see why the past has to matter. 
So many believe that it is love that grows, but it is the knowing that grows and love simply expands to contain it. 
I realized when you look at your mother, you are looking at the purest love you will ever know. 
he is both the source of my happiness and the one i want to share it with. 
I want my world to start and end with you. 
Love, that moves the sun and the other stars 
I want him to love me as much as I love him. 
She knew whose love she doubted. It wasn't her parents' and it wasn't her friends: It was her own. 
You have a beautiful laugh. Like the promise of tomorrow. 
Faith goes up the stairs that love has built and looks out the windows which hope has opened. 
I wanted movement and not a calm course of existence. I wanted excitement and danger and the chance to sacrifice myself for my love. 
Sometimes you have to learn to love what's good for you. 
, . Those mornings when we kiss and surrender for an hour before we say a single word. 
What are you wishing for?' Grace interrupted. 'To kiss you,' I said to her. 
Don't be afraid to lose him, because if a man truly loves you, he's not going anywhere 
If you have reasons to love someone, you don’t love them. 
Just knowing you exist changed the world for me. 
You have within you,right now,everything you need to deal with whatever the world can throw at you. 
Love is a game of tic-tac-toe, constantly waiting for the next x or o. 
He is the cheese to my macaroni. 
love is blind and lovers cannot see the pretty follies that themselves commit 
I’m not a warrior or a goddess,” I said at last. Adrian leaned closer. “As far as I’m concerned, you’re both. 
A gentleman holds my hand. A man pulls my hair. A soulmate will do both. 
It is love, not reason, that is stronger than death. 
Kitten, your hands are heaven and your eyes are my home. 
I’m sort of… coming off a bad relationship” “When did it end?” “Slightly before it started. 
some things are better left in the past. And true things are destined to repeat themselves. 
She writes things with her movements that I for the life of me could never write with a pen. 
She had never imagined she had the power to make someone else so happy. And not a magical power, either--a purely human one. 
To love someone enough to let them go, you had to let them go forever or you did not love them that much. 
When what you want is a relationship, and not a person, get a dog. 
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman, that his love has an earlier death. 
I think about you every second of every day and I don’t know how to get over you,” she says. “Don’t,” I beg her. “Please don’t get over me. 
You can give without loving, but you can never love without giving. 
You'll never be able to let him go. You'll always feel wrong about being with me. 
I am the poet of the poor, because I was poor when I loved; since I could not give gifts, I gave words. 
Ah me, but where are now the songs I sang When life was sweet because you call’d them sweet? 
Love can rebuild the world, they say, so everything's possible when it comes to love. 
To love makes one solitary. 
True love always makes a man better, no matter what woman inspires it. 
There are all kinds of ways for a relationship to be tested, even broken, some, irrevocably; it’s the endings we’re unprepared for. 
After all, a woman who doesn't love cats is never going to be make a man happy. 
Soul connections are not often found and are worth every bit of fight left in you to keep. 
And think not you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
He didn't realize that love as powerful as your mother's for you leaves its own mark. 
The heart makes its choices without weighing the consequences. It doesn't look ahead to the lonely nights that follow. 
—I don't want to lose you —Then why are you the one that keeps letting go? 
You left with my soul in your fists and my heart in your teeth, and I don’t want either of them back.” ~Ben 
What’s wrong is that every morning and every night, I lie in bed wondering why you’re not beside me. 
We all know interspecies romance is weird. 
May I kiss you then? On this miserable paper? I might as well open the window and kiss the night air. 
Everything happens for a reason and, something better will come along for me! 
I shouldn't have to be a liar to make someone love me. I shouldn't be so afraid of losing someone that I'll do anything to make them stay. 
Mine was the twilight and the morning. Mine was a world of rooftops and love songs. 
I love you for who you are, not who the world thinks you should be. 
He didn't marry you to become king. He became king because he wanted to marry you. 
I know what I have given you I do not know what you have received. 
No human should mislead another by promising them something they know to be untrue. 
People fall in love without reason, without even wanting to. You can't predict it. That's love. 
You promised, Seaweed Brain. We would not get separated! Ever again!” “You’re impossible!” “Love you too! 
Sometimes I think gravity may be death in disguise. Other times I think gravity is love, which is why love's only demand is that we fall. 
Three years? That's a thousand tomorrows, ma'am. 
Set the standard! Stop expecting others to show you love, acceptance, commitment, & respect when you don't even show that to yourself. 
Perhaps people like us cannot love. Ordinary people can - that is their secret. 
The supreme happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved; loved for ourselves—say rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us love. 
I guess the sacrifice of my dignity is the only thing that will save us now. The things I endure for love. The Fates laugh at my torment. 
Don’t marry him. Don’t be with him. Be with me. 
Sometimes I think my whole life has been about holding on to you. 
The only sea I saw Was the seesaw sea With you riding on it. Lie down, lie easy. Let me shipwreck in your thighs. 
It's not at all hard to understand a person; it's only hard to listen without bias. 
How far have you walked for men who’ve never held your feet in their laps? 
He went through life with his hands firmly shoved into his pockets. She danced. 
He didn't mind how he looked to other people, because the nursery magic had made him Real, and when you are Real shabbiness doesn't matter. 
I want your most vital organ. I want it to be mine. 
The surest way to hurt yourself is to give up on love, just because it didn’t work out the first time. 
She blushed and so did he. She greeted him in a faltering voice, and he spoke to her without knowing what he was saying. 
What made me run away was doubtless not so much the fear of settling down, but of settling down permanently in something ugly. 
He loved her, he loved her, and until he'd loved her she had never minded being alone . 
Like time suspended, a wound unmended-- you and I. We had no ending, no said goodbye; For all my life, I'll wonder why. 
Never stop smiling not even when you're sad, someone might fall in love with your smile. 
If you love something let it go.. if it comes back its yours 
It is impossible to manufacture or imitate love. 
The practice of love offers no place of safety. We risk loss, hurt, pain. We risk being acted upon by forces outside our control. 
No you sick, stupid creep, I love you. I shouldn't. I shouldn't. You're sick inside, Caine, sick! But I love you. - Diana 
Kids chase the love that eludes them. 
Just because you love someone, doesn't mean you have to be involved with them. Love is not a bandage to cover wounds. 
Anatasia You Are My More My Love, My Life Christian 
Human existence is so fragile a thing and exposed to such dangers that I cannot love without trembling. 
It is better to have an enemy who will fight you in an open field then a lover who will kill you in your sleep. 
There is only one happiness in life, to love and be loved. 
Where is Aelin. Where is my wife? 
I pray you, do not fall in love with me, for I am falser than vows made in wine. 
Lift your hips for me, love. 
For some people, “the point of no return” begins at the very moment their souls become aware of each others’ existence. 
‎I never wanted to have anything in my life that I couldn't stand losing. But it's too late for that. 
Time is how you spend your love. 
I prayed for all his dreams to come true. I prayed that I would always be able to connect with him--even if I was no longer on earth. 
I can hate you more, but I'll never love you less. 
Falling in love was like falling off a cliff. It felt pretty much like flying until you hit the ground. 
Real love finds you once, if you're lucky. 
Falling in love should be the easiest thing in the world, but it's not. 
Sometimes you know in your heart you love someone, but you have to go away before your head can figure it out. 
If love be rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love for pricking and you beat love down. 
What you are to do without me I cannot imagine. 
I loved you long before you loved me. It's the only thing I have you beat at, and I'll bring it up every chance I get. 
Having an eye for beauty isn't the same thing as a weakness except possibly when it comes to you. 
Time expands, then contracts, all in tune with the stirrings of the heart. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love . 
I miss everything about you Can't believe that I still want you And after all the things we've been through 
Love is on every side, and no one's side. Don't ask what Love can do for you. 
In God there is no hunger that needs to be filled, only plenteousness that desires to give. 
One heart cannot serve two masters. 
Love heals scars love left 
Because because she came here with me. 
We can live without religion and meditation, but we cannot survive without human affection. 
The most difficult aspect of moving on is accepting that the other person already did. 
I was feeling insecure you might not love me anymore 
She thought she was independent and strong, but she got one small taste of love and she was hungrier than anyone. She was ravenous. 
He will love only once - but it will be for always. 
Love is a fruit in season at all times and within reach of every hand. 
It took me years to figure out that upset was upset, and tumultuousness was not the same thing as passion. Love isn't drama. 
Your greatest awakening comes, when you are aware about your infinite nature. 
You must learn to forgive a man when he's in love. He's always a nuisance. 
I'm with you. No matter what else you have in your head I'm with you and I love you. 
You see, there are some people that one loves, and others that perhaps one would rather be with. 
If it's ka it'll come like a wind, and your plans will stand before it no more than a barn before a cyclone 
We're not words, Henry, we're people. Words are how others define us, but we can define ourselves any way we choose. 
It's become impossible to deny he means something to me. 
Traveling in the company of those we love is home in motion. 
and the two of them loved each other for a long time in silence without making love again. 
Suddenly it was too hard to be in his presence, too painful to know that he would belong to someone else. 
Whoever loves much, performs much, and can accomplish much, and what is done in love is done well. 
In this story I am the poet You're the poetry. 
I begin to long for some little language such as lovers use, broken words, inarticulate words, like the shuffling of feet on pavement. 
Books are to me as homemade tattoos are to an inmate. Can't get enough of them. 
Tucker strokes my hair. There's something so tender about the gesture. It might as well have been him whispering . 
I love you beyond paint, beyond melodies, beyond words. And I hope you will always feel that, even when I'm not around to tell you so. 
I know your soul. Everything else is just an ornament. 
It’s just so strange. You used to love me, and now you’re a stranger who happens to know all of my secrets. 
Why is it that words like these seem dull and cold? Is it because there is no word tender enough to be your name? 
Nothing of real worth can ever be bought. Love, friendship, honour, valour, respect. All these things have to be earned. 
We have all known the long loneliness and we have learned that the only solution is love and that love comes with community. 
I love you every day. And now I will miss you every day. 
I know and I love you. But I don't think we love each other in the same way. And I think keeping you near me, would destroy me. 
Love is the only future God offers. 
Some girls are full of heartache and poetry and those are the kind of girls who try to save wolves instead of running away from them. 
Darkness may hide the trees and the flowers from the eyes but it cannot hide love from the soul. 
The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr. 
We were very different, and we disagreed about a lot of things, but he was always so interesting, you know? 
The worst thing: to give yourself away in exchange for not enough love. 
I mean, I hope you're happy, But the sky is still the sky without you, And I'm not surprised by that anymore. 
A person learns how to love himself through the simple acts of loving and being loved by someone else. 
The Eskimo has fifty-names for snow because it is important to them; there ought to be as many for love. 
Happiness is the china shop; love is the bull. 
it’s a blessed thing to love and feel loved in return. 
To long a sacrifice can make a stone of a heart 
If I love you, is that a fact or a weapon? 
You don't fall in love with someone because it's convenient. 
For Beatrice, when we first met, I was lonely, and you were pretty. Now I am pretty lonely. 
You'd be surprised what people will do for money that they wouldn't do for love. Myrnin. 
It’s impossible,” he snapped. “Why?” “Because I’m Sebastian, Lord St. Vincent. I can’t be celibate. Everyone knows that. 
I love you more than songs can say, but I can't keep running after yesterday 
If people did not love one another, I really don't see what use there would be in having any spring. 
no woman can love a weak man hard enough to make him strong. 
The sun's gone dim, and the moon's gone black. For I loved him, and he didn't love back. 
Marriage is not a process for prolonging the life of love, sir. It merely mummifies its corpse. 
i didn't fall in love of course it's never up to you but she was walking back and forth and i was passing through 
Ronan's second secret was Adam Parrish. 
A heart, once stolen, can never be taken back. 
Gilbert, I'm afraid I'm scandalously in love with you. 
You know, when it works, love is amazing. It's not overrated. 
Do you think we can be friends?” I asked. He stared up at the ceiling. “Probably not, but we can pretend. 
When you want something this badly, you don't just give up. You fight and fight until you absolutely can't fight anymore. 
Quit being so hard on yourself. We are what we are; we love what we love. We don't need to justify it to anyone not even to ourselves. 
You can't anyone love you. You just have to reveal who you are and take your chances. (105) 
Time has no meaning, Love will endure.. 
I am yours. Don't give myself back to me. 
Love at first sight is easy to understand; it's when two people have been looking at each other for a lifetime that it becomes a miracle. 
I've never wanted more, until I met you. 
It’s not so much the journey that’s important; as is the way that we treat those we encounter and those around us, along the way 
I wanted to see the place where Margaret grew to what she is, even at the worst time of all, when I had no hope of ever calling her mine. 
Love. It was the beginning and end of everything, the foundation and the ceiling and the air in between. 
And I still love you in my own fucked-up way. I miss you, I really do. Can we still be friends? 
The quickest path to self-destruction is to push away the people you love. 
One loves truly only once in a lifetime, Julian, even if one isn’t aware of it. 
and all I could think was that I would like to spend every morning for the rest of my life waking up beside her 
A wonderful gift may not be wrapped as you expect. 
If you claim to be a real friend then be real in your soul. If you claim to be fake then be an enemy instead. 
I wondered if the person who really loves you is the person who knows all your stories, the person who WANTS to know all your stories. 
I would know you anywhere for my true love. Whoever I was and whoever you were, I would know you at once for my true love. 
You'll probably die if you stay with me,' he told me. 'Then I'm dead either way, because I won't survive without you. 
If someone does not want me it is not the end of the world. But if I do not want me, the world is nothing but endings. 
One is never wounded by the love one gives, only by the love one expects. 
To love and be loved is to feel the sun from both sides. 
Once you figure out who you are and what you love about yourself, I think it all kind of falls into place. 
Language is the key to the heart of people. 
I feel like myself, strong and weak at once - allowed, at least for a little while, to be both. 
She wanted to lose herself in him. To tie his arms around her like a tourniquet. If she showed him how much she needed him, he'd run away. 
Real love is to offer your life at the feet of another. 
It's delicious to have people adore you, but it's exhausting, too. Particularly when your own feelings don't match theirs. 
Peace,love,empathy 
I am the least difficult of men. All I want is boundless love. 
LOVE is a friendship set to music 
Akkarin: I watched the first woman I loved die. I dont think I can survive losing the second. Sonea: I love you too. 
What will survive of us is love. - from 
Love is Love no matter old you are, and I knew if I gave you enough time, you'd come back to me. 
Don't touch me; I'll die if you touch me. 
I am lonely, yet not everybody will do. I don’t know why, some people fill the gaps and others emphasize my loneliness. 
They had an ordinary life, full of ordinary things-if love can ever be called that. 
Your inner strength is your outer foundation 
Why is it so hard to articulate love yet so easy to express disappointment? 
In the darkness, he is invisible, but I can still feel him beside me. Sometimes you don't have to see something to know it is there. 
To love another human in all of her splendor and imperfect perfection , it is a magnificent task tremendous and foolish and human. 
Love, too, has to be learned. 
Not sure how I felt about Antonio and Echo, I linked my fingers with hers. Antonio cocked a surprised eyebrow. 
if they put an iron circle around your neck I will bite it away 
It's true that nothing in this world makes us so necessary to others as the affection we have for them. 
The main facts in human life are five: birth, food, sleep, love and death. 
When I walk, I walk with you. Where I go, you're with me always. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
There is peace even in the storm 
I had fallen too far. I was in love with Rush Finlay. 
That I shall love always, I argue thee that love is life, and life hath immortality 
Love is the most selfish of all the passions. 
You're better than seven years of food. You're better than windows. You're even better than the sky. 
People don't need love. What they need is success in one form or another. It can be love but it needn't be. 
I love you, Missy girl. Even if I can't be with you, know that I'm here. So, that's it. More than the stars, Taylor. More than the stars. 
A broken heart is just the growing pains necessary so that you can love more completely when the real thing comes along. 
Love me sweet With all thou art Feeling, thinking, seeing; Love me in the Lightest part, Love me in full Being. 
There will be no more British guys. Unless they are members of the royal family, of course. 
It may be that you are settled in another place it may be that you are happy but the one who took your heart wields final power. 
Deep in my heart I'm concealing things that I'm longing to say. Scared to confess what I'm feeling - frightened you'll slip away. 
Hide yourself in God, so when a man wants to find you he will have to go there first. 
Him that I love, I wish to be free -- even from me. 
Like your the ocean and he's desperate to drown. 
There are not enough days in forever to allow me to fully express the depth of my love for you. 
Love is forever. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be love. The world is beautiful. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be the world. 
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest. 
Any time not spent on love is wasted. 
Wine enters through the mouth, Love, the eyes. I raise the glass to my mouth, I look at you, I sigh. 
To become vegetarian is to step into the stream which leads to nirvana. 
Were knowledge all, what were our need To thrill and faint and sweetly bleed? 
A couple of times in your life, it happens like that. You meet a stranger, and all you know is that you need to know everything about him. 
Faith is why I'm here today and faith is why I made it through. 
So shut up, live, travel, adventure, bless and don't be sorry 
It is a bad thing to have love and nowhere to put it. 
Yesterday we obeyed kings and bent our necks before emperors. But today we kneel only to truth, follow only beauty, and obey only love. 
How beautiful would it be if we could just see souls instead of bodies? To see love and compassion instead of curves. 
I wonder how much of the day I spend just callin' after you. 
I love you. It hurts more than anything ever has, but I do. So don't you dare tell me I don't. Don't you ever say it again! 
Loving you was like going to war; I never came back the same. 
Desire is the kind of thing that eats you and leaves you starving. 
Accidents ambush the unsuspecting, often violently, just like love. 
I am a restlessness inside a stillness inside a restlessness. 
It was the first time I was ever in love, and I learned a lot. Before that I'd never even thought about killing myself. 
Love cures people, both the ones who give it and the ones who receive it. 
You and I, it's as though we have been taught to kiss in heaven and sent down to earth together, to see if we know what we were taught. 
I love you now for what we've already shared, and I love you now in anticipation of all that's to come. 
to love means to realize there is a time to let the beloved one go 
All children should be taught to unconditionally accept, approve, admire, appreciate, forgive, trust, and ultimately, love their own person. 
She wanted to cause him pain for taking a place in her heart she wouldn't have given him if she'd known the truth. 
I had forgotten how much light there is in the world, till you gave it back to me. 
A man is only as good as what he loves. 
Blessed is the influence of one true, loving human soul on another. 
There's two kinds of women--those you write poems about and those you don't. 
Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? 
You're still alive. And that means you'll love and be loved and in the end, nothing else really matters. 
Why did dusk and fir-scent and the afterglow of autumnal sunsets make people say absurd things? 
Vane grabbed me. “DuLac, let’s chat.” British-speak for “Stand still while I yell at you. 
Nothing revives the past so completely as a smell that was once associated with it. 
Little did I realise how much I would miss those ten minutes, those ten minutes in which I lived an entire lifetime. 
So I learned two things that night, and the next day, from him: the perfection of a moment, and the fleeting nature of it. 
I have made a lot of mistakes falling in love, and regretted most of them, but never the potatoes that went with them. 
You can’t fool people into loving you. 
Why be alone when we can be together baby You can make my life worthwhile And I can make you start to smile 
Though sorrow may impede my heart, It is of great love to have known you. 
But she needs me more than she needs him and I guess being needed is almost as good as being loved. Maybe better. 
The Artist always has the masters in his eyes. 
I profess not to know how women's hearts are wooed and won. To me they have always been matters of riddle and admiration. 
You have to live each hour as if it's your last and each day as if you were immortal. - Kate Sheffield 
A perfect person is easy to love. But when somebody likes all your imperfections, well, that's when you know they really mean it. 
The strength of a man isn't seen in the power of his arms. It's seen in the love with which he EMBRACES you. 
Oh to have you with me, to have you here, not to be alone, but to be with you, my beauty, you of all souls! You. 
Life is slippery. We all need a loving hand to hold onto. 
Love needs room to grow. Like a rose. Or a tumor. 
In love there are two things - bodies and words. 
Yours (now I'm even losing my name - it was getting shorter and shorter all the time and is now: Yours) 
I wonder if it's medically possible to be addicted to another human being. 
We outgrow love like other things and put it in a drawer, till it an antique fashion shows like costumes grandsires wore. 
Of all the bright cruel lies they tell you, the cruelest is the one called love. 
I'd shut the whole world down just to tell you 
For awhile, I thought that was love. -Gaara 
Love of love written by the broken hearted, love of life written by the dead. 
She knew with painful certainty that the opposite of love was not hate, but indifference. 
Some things are private. Some things needed to be said, even when the person who needed to hear them couldn’t hear anything. Ever again. 
If you don't love me, it does not matter, anyway I can love for both of us 
I fell in love with his unchanging soul. 
This last night we tear into each other, as if to wound, as if to find the key to everything before morning. 
Falling in love is painful on the knees. 
I know I'm not going to be in your head all the time. But once you know me, I'll be forever in your heart. 
You know you're in love when you can't fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams. 
Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that. 
A friend is someone who knows all about you and still loves you. 
It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are not. 
We accept the love we think we deserve. 
As he read, I fell in love the way you fall asleep: slowly, and then all at once. 
It is not a lack of love, but a lack of friendship that makes unhappy marriages. 
Love all, trust a few, do wrong to none. 
Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage. 
There is never a time or place for true love. It happens accidentally, in a heartbeat, in a single flashing, throbbing moment. 
Love is that condition in which the happiness of another person is essential to your own. 
Love is like the wind, you can't see it but you can feel it. 
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind, And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. 
If you can make a woman laugh, you can make her do anything. 
You don't love someone because they're perfect, you love them in spite of the fact that they're not. 
There is nothing I would not do for those who are really my friends. I have no notion of loving people by halves, it is not my nature. 
If I had a flower for every time I thought of you I could walk through my garden forever. 
The real lover is the man who can thrill you by kissing your forehead or smiling into your eyes or just staring into space. 
When someone loves you, the way they talk about you is different. You feel safe and comfortable. 
A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony in a moment. 
To die will be an awfully big adventure. 
Just when you think it can't get any worse, it can. And just when you think it can't get any better, it can. 
Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
I love you as certain dark things are to be loved, in secret, between the shadow and the soul. 
The one you love and the one who loves you are never, ever the same person. 
Love is needing someone. Love is putting up with someone's bad qualities because they somehow complete you. 
One is loved because one is loved. No reason is needed for loving. 
We love the things we love for what they are. 
I would die for you. But I won't live for you. 
You are, and always have been, my dream. 
The only thing worse than a boy who hates you: a boy that loves you. 
So, I love you because the entire universe conspired to help me find you. 
Never love anyone who treats you like you're ordinary. 
Where there is love there is life. 
I would always rather be happy than dignified. 
Once upon a time there was a boy who loved a girl, and her laughter was a question he wanted to spend his whole life answering. 
Nobody has ever measured, not even poets, how much the heart can hold. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love. 
This is a good sign, having a broken heart. It means we have tried for something. 
We loved with a love that was more than love. 
He's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same. 
The more I know of the world, the more I am convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require so much! 
I have decided to stick to love Hate is too great a burden to bear. 
They say a person needs just three things to be truly happy in this world: someone to love, something to do, and something to hope for. 
What's meant to be will always find a way 
Two people in love, alone, isolated from the world, that's beautiful. 
The heart was made to be broken. 
This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. 
For the two of us, home isn't a place. It is a person. And we are finally home. 
Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
The very essence of romance is uncertainty. 
There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness. 
Man may have discovered fire, but women discovered how to play with it. 
And, in the end The love you take is equal to the love you make. 
Love does not consist of gazing at each other, but in looking outward together in the same direction. 
Love is a fire. But whether it is going to warm your hearth or burn down your house, you can never tell. 
If you remember me, then I don't care if everyone else forgets. 
Love doesn't just sit there, like a stone, it has to be made, like bread; remade all the time, made new. 
It was love at first sight, at last sight, at ever and ever sight. 
And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. 
Be careful of love. It'll twist your brain around and leave you thinking up is down and right is wrong. 
If you like her, if she makes you happy, and if you feel like you know her---then don't let her go. 
If you love somebody, let them go, for if they return, they were always yours. If they don't, they never were. 
When love is not madness it is not love. 
I love you more than there are stars in the sky and fish in the sea. 
I love you. Remember. They cannot take it 
Love does not begin and end the way we seem to think it does. Love is a battle, love is a war; love is a growing up. 
A woman's heart should be so hidden in God that a man has to seek Him just to find her. 
Do you think I'm pretty? I think you're beautiful Beautiful? You are so beautiful, it hurts sometimes. 
Declarations of love amuse me. Especially when unrequited. 
Love is an irresistible desire to be irresistibly desired. 
True love is rare, and it's the only thing that gives life real meaning. 
I was smiling yesterday,I am smiling today and I will smile tomorrow.Simply because life is too short to cry for anything. 
If I can stop one heart from breaking, I shall not live in vain. 
I think if it is true that there are as many minds as there are heads, then there are as many kinds of love as there are hearts. 
When the power of love overcomes the love of power, the world will know peace. 
It is a curious thought, but it is only when you see people looking ridiculous that you realize just how much you love them. 
Hate the sin, love the sinner. 
The greater the love, the greater the tragedy when it's over. 
I loved her against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that could be. 
Of all forms of caution, caution in love is perhaps the most fatal to true happiness. 
One love, one heart, one destiny. 
All I ever wanted was to reach out and touch another human being not just with my hands but with my heart. 
You know, when it works, love is pretty amazing. It's not overrated. There's a reason for all those songs. 
The most painful thing is losing yourself in the process of loving someone too much, and forgetting that you are special too. 
We waste time looking for the perfect lover, instead of creating the perfect love. 
Gravitation is not responsible for people falling in love. 
Never close your lips to those whom you have already opened your heart. 
Any fool can be happy. It takes a man with real heart to make beauty out of the stuff that makes us weep. 
Find what you love and let it kill you. 
Love is not affectionate feeling, but a steady wish for the loved person's ultimate good as far as it can be obtained. 
The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends. 
Things we lose have a way of coming back to us in the end, if not always in the way we expect. 
One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well. 
I want To do with you what spring does with the cherry trees. 
Look after my heart - I've left it with you. 
I would like to be the air that inhabits you for a moment only. I would like to be that unnoticed and that necessary. 
He does something to me, that boy. Every time. It’s his only detriment. He steps on my heart. He makes me cry. 
Have enough courage to trust love one more time and always one more time. 
You can't measure the mutual affection of two human beings by the number of words they exchange. 
Tonight I can write the saddest lines I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 
Sometimes it's a form of love just to talk to somebody that you have nothing in common with and still be fascinated by their presence. 
As if you were on fire from within. The moon lives in the lining of your skin. 
Happiness [is] only real when shared 
A DEFINITION NOT FOUND IN THE DICTIONARY Not leaving: an act of trust and love, often deciphered by children 
One day you will kiss a man you can't breathe without, and find that breath is of little consequence. 
I wasn't actually in love, but I felt a sort of tender curiosity. 
Promise me you'll never forget me because if I thought you would, I'd never leave. 
Then I realize what it is. It's him. Something about him makes me feel like I am about to fall. Or turn to liquid. Or burst into flames. 
Art and love are the same thing: It’s the process of seeing yourself in things that are not you. 
I loved you like a man loves a woman he never touches, only writes to, keeps little photographs of. 
It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important. 
Tears shed for another person are not a sign of weakness. They are a sign of a pure heart. 
You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection 
A half-read book is a half-finished love affair. 
Happiness is holding someone in your arms and knowing you hold the whole world. 
There is only one page left to write on. I will fill it with words of only one syllable. I love. I have loved. I will love. 
Someone I loved once gave me a box full of darkness. It took me years to understand that this too, was a gift. 
I'm oxygen and he's dying to breathe. 
To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance. 
I'm on Aslan's side even if there isn't any Aslan to lead it. I'm going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn't any Narnia. 
Who, being loved, is poor? 
I like flaws. I think they make things interesting. 
A purpose of human life, no matter who is controlling it, is to love whoever is around to be loved. 
Love can change a person the way a parent can change a baby- awkwardly, and often with a great deal of mess. 
It is easy to love people in memory; the hard thing is to love them when they are there in front of you. 
You know how they say you only hurt the ones you love? Well, it works both ways. 
When I saw you I fell in love, and you smiled because you knew. 
I fell in love with her when we were together, then fell deeper in love with her in the years we were apart. 
Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. 
What she had realized was that love was that moment when your heart was about to burst. 
One word Frees us of all the weight and pain of life: That word is love. 
Friendship marks a life even more deeply than love. Love risks degenerating into obsession, friendship is never anything but sharing. 
Sorrow is how we learn to love. Your heart isn't breaking. It hurts because it's getting larger. The larger it gets, the more love it holds. 
The love of learning, the sequestered nooks, And all the sweet serenity of books 
The more one judges, the less one loves. 
I guess that’s just part of loving people: You have to give things up. Sometimes you even have to give them up. 
The heart has its reasons which reason knows not. 
The emotion that can break your heart is sometimes the very one that heals it 
Come sleep with me: We won't make Love, Love will make us. 
Holding Eleanor's hand was like holding a butterfly. Or a heartbeat. Like holding something complete, and completely alive. 
Sometimes love means letting go when you want to hold on tighter. 
Trust your heart if the seas catch fire, live by love though the stars walk backward. 
Ever has it been that love knows not its own depth until the hour of separation. 
When someone is in your heart, they're never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
Don't cry over someone who wouldn't cry over you. 
I wonder how many people don't get the one they want, but end up with the one they're supposed to be with. 
Being with you never felt wrong. It's the one thing I did right. You're the one thing I did right. 
Absence diminishes small loves and increases great ones, as the wind blows out the candle and fans the bonfire. 
Let go of me! 
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love thee to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach 
When you trip over love, it is easy to get up. But when you fall in love, it is impossible to stand again. 
To be fully seen by somebody, then, and be loved anyhow - this is a human offering that can border on miraculous. 
This is where it all begins. Everything starts here, today. 
I want to be in a relationship where you telling me you love me is just a ceremonious validation of what you already show me. 
True love is usually the most inconvenient kind. 
To lose balance sometimes for love is part of living a balanced life. 
Nothing takes the taste out of peanut butter quite like unrequited love. 
The sunlight claps the earth, and the moonbeams kiss the sea: what are all these kissings worth, if thou kiss not me? 
The things we love destroy us every time, lad. Remember that. 
If you love something set it free, but don't be surprised if it comes back with herpes. 
My wish is that you may be loved to the point of madness. 
Throw your dreams into space like a kite, and you do not know what it will bring back, a new life, a new friend, a new love, a new country. 
The course of true love never did run smooth. 
If we have no peace, it is because we have forgotten that we belong to each other. 
sometimes you don't need a goal in life, you don't need to know the big picture. you just need to know what you're going to do next! 
I won't ever leave you, even though you're always leaving me. 
I love you as certain dark things are loved, secretly, between the shadow and the soul. 
The world was collapsing, and the only thing that really mattered to me was that she was alive. 
Romance is the glamour which turns the dust of everyday life into a golden haze. 
We are who we are, be­cause of those we choose to love and be­cause of those who love us. 
You have to kiss a lot of frogs before you find your prince 
When I look in the mirror, I know I’m looking at someone who isn’t sure she deserves to be loved at all. 
For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken. It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack. 
For where all love is, the speaking is unnecessary 
I bet you could sometimes find all the mysteries of the universe in someone's hand. 
The human heart is a strange vessel. Love and hatred can exist side by side. 
If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he couldn't love as much in eighty years as I could in a day. 
Spending time with you showed me what I’ve been missing in my life. 
It is possible to be in love with you just because of who you are. 
The music in his laughter had a way of rounding off the missing notes in her soul. 
If only she could be so oblivious again, to feel such love without knowing it, mistaking it for laughter. 
More smiling, less worrying. More compassion, less judgment. More blessed, less stressed. More love, less hate. 
Each of us is born with a box of matches inside us but we can't strike them all by ourselves 
love, I've come to understand is more than three words mumbled before bedtime. 
The highest function of love is that it makes the loved one a unique and irreplaceable being. 
It's not how much we give but how much love we put into giving. 
Love is how you stay alive, even after you are gone. 
Don't waste your love on somebody, who doesn't value it. 
I know enough to know that no woman should ever marry a man who hated his mother. 
The soul is healed by being with children. 
And next time you're planning to injure yourself to get me attention, just remember that a little sweet talk works wonders. 
I'd learned that some things are best kept secret. 
I have feelings too. I am still human. All I want is to be loved, for myself and for my talent. 
True love is not so much a matter of romance as it is a matter of anxious concern for the well-being of one's companion. 
Sometimes God allows what he hates to accomplish what he loves. 
Let yourself be drawn by the stronger pull of that which you truly love. 
Just because you're beautiful and perfect, it's made you conceited. 
That's what people do who love you. They put their arms around you and love you when you're not so lovable. 
It's hard being left behind. ( ) It's hard to be the one who stays. 
You are the one girl that made me risk eveything for a future worth having. 
Yours is the light by which my spirit's born: - you are my sun, my moon, and all my stars. 
Love is not the absence of logic but logic examined and recalculated heated and curved to fit inside the contours of the heart 
Love has nothing to do with what you are expecting to get - only with what you are expecting to give - which is everything 
The heart is the toughest part of the body. Tenderness is in the hands. 
I belong to my beloved, and my beloved is mine. 
Moments, when lost, can't be found again. They're just gone. 
Love is the extremely difficult realization that something other than oneself is real. 
Someday you'll find someone special again. People who've been in love once usually do. It's in their nature. 
Why are old lovers able to become friends? Two reasons. They never truly loved each other, or they love each other still. 
Love, n. A temporary insanity curable by marriage. 
Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow, That I shall say good night till it be morrow. 
When it's gone, you'll know what a gift love was. You'll suffer like this. So go back and fight to keep it. 
Romance is thinking about your significant other, when you are supposed to be thinking about something else. 
True love comes quietly, without banners or flashing lights. If you hear bells, get your ears checked. 
I wonder if fears ever really go away, or if they just lose their power over us. 
Love, it never dies. It never goes away, it never fades, so long as you hang on to it. Love can make you immortal 
There is always something left to love. 
Trust no friend without faults, and love a woman, but no angel. 
We must love one another or die 
Despite your best efforts, people are going to be hurt when it's time for them to be hurt. 
If a thing loves, it is infinite. 
No woman wants to be in submission to a man who isn't in submission to God! 
Be the reason someone smiles. Be the reason someone feels loved and believes in the goodness in people. 
There is nothing more truly artistic than to love people. 
Love is a better master than duty. 
It doesn't matter who you are or what you look like, so long as somebody loves you. 
The greatest happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved -- loved for ourselves, or rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
No matter how much you think you love somebody, you'll step back when the pool of their blood edges up too close. 
What greater gift than the love of a cat. 
So it’s true, when all is said and done, grief is the price we pay for love. 
He is beauty, inside and out. He is the silver lining in a world of darkness. He is my light. 
There's a difference between really loving someone and loving the idea of her. 
Goodbyes are only for those who love with their eyes. Because for those who love with heart and soul there is no such thing as separation. 
We are all worthy of one another. 
Love cannot be reduced to a catalogue of reasons why, and a catalogue of reasons cannot be put together into love. 
The fate of your heart is your choice and no one else gets a vote 
Lovers alone wear sunlight. 
Oh no. Don't smile. You'll kill me. I stop breathing when you smile. 
My great hope is to laugh as much as I cry; to get my work done and try to love somebody and have the courage to accept the love in return. 
Do I love you? My God, if your love were a grain of sand, mine would be a universe of beaches. 
The great tragedy of life is not that men perish, but that they cease to love. 
I think it is all a matter of love; the more you love a memory the stronger and stranger it becomes 
The scariest thing about distance is that you don’t know whether they’ll miss you or forget you. 
Nothing ever happens like you imagine it will 
I think we ought to live happily ever after. 
With him, life was routine; without him, life was unbearable. 
The day the power of love overrules the love of power, the world will know peace. 
I don’t know what they are called, the spaces between seconds– but I think of you always in those intervals. 
Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as my own: in pain and sickness it would still be dear. 
Love is a rebellious bird, that nobody can tame, and you call him quite in vain, if it suits him not to come. 
The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only thing more impossible than staying was leaving. 
Anyone who loves in the expectation of being loved in return is wasting their time. 
When you love someone, you say their name different. Like it's safe inside your mouth. 
You're like a song that I heard when I was a little kid but forgot I knew until I heard it again. 
Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them, humanity cannot survive. 
Wherever you will go, I will let you down, But this lullaby goes on. 
It’s dark now and I am very tired. I love you, always. Time is nothing. 
I'm not sure this is a world I belong in anymore. I'm not sure that I want to wake up. 
I have never found anybody who could stand to accept the daily demonstrative love I feel in me, and give back as good as I give. 
Heaven would never be heaven without you. 
I know my heart will never be the same But I'm telling myself I'll be okay 
The moment you stop to think about whether you love someone, you've already stopped loving that person forever. 
I'm saying I'm in love with you! I've been in love with you this whole bleeding year! 
I may not always be with you But when we're far apart Remember you will be with me Right inside my heart 
[H]iding how you really feel and trying to make everyone happy doesn't make you nice, it just makes you a liar. 
Do what you love, love what you do, and with all your heart give yourself to it. 
My mother she is beautiful, softened at the edges and tempered with a spine of steel. I want to grow old and be like her. 
The best things in life make you sweaty. 
Love recognizes no barriers. It jumps hurdles, leaps fences, penetrates walls to arrive at its destination full of hope. 
To fear love is to fear life, and those who fear life are already 3-parts dead. 
Parents were the only ones obligated to love you; from the rest of the world you had to earn it. 
Morning without you is a dwindled dawn. 
There ain't no way you can hold onto something that wants to go, you understand? You can only love what you got while you got it. 
Whenever you are confronted with an opponent. Conquer him with love. 
When in a relationship, a real man doesn't make his woman jealous of others, he makes others jealous of his woman. 
Some people feel like they don't deserve love. They walk away quietly into empty spaces, trying to close the gaps of the past. 
Those sweet lips. My, oh my, I could kiss those lips all night long. Good things come to those who wait. 
The Bible tells us to love our neighbors, and also to love our enemies; probably because generally they are the same people. 
You are my life now. 
The strongest love is the love that can demonstrate its fragility. 
It's the imperfections that make things beautiful 
Accept the things to which fate binds you, and love the people with whom fate brings you together,but do so with all your heart. 
When you have seen as much of life as I have, you will not underestimate the power of obsessive love. 
One day spent with someone you love can change everything. 
Remember that the best relationship is one in which your love for each other exceeds your need for each other. 
There is no love sincerer than the love of food. 
Love is like a brick. You can build a house, or you can sink a dead body. 
I will not try to convince you to love me, to respect me, to commit to me. I deserve better than that; I AM BETTER THAN THAT Goodbye. 
She wasn't doing a thing that I could see, except standing there leaning on the balcony railing, holding the universe together. 
If you ever looked at me once with what I know is in you, I would be your slave. 
The great thing to remember is that though our feelings come and go God's love for us does not. 
Keep your best wishes, close to your heart and watch what happens 
If you love a flower that lives on a star, it is sweet to look at the sky at night. All the stars are a-bloom with flowers 
Her heart was a secret garden and the walls were very high. 
I envy people that know love. That have someone who takes them as they are. 
I don't care what you say to me. I care what you share with me. 
I know you're tired but come, this is the way. 
The voice of Love seemed to call to me, but it was a wrong number. 
Love, the poet said, is woman's whole existence. 
If I love you, what business is it of yours? 
When you love someone you let them take care of you. 
He's not your prince charming if he doesn't make sure you know that you're his princess. 
nothing in this world was more difficult than love. 
Friends are the family you choose (~ Nin/Ithilnin, Elven rogue). 
Being with you and not being with you is the only way I have to measure time. 
All my heart is yours, sir: it belongs to you; and with you it would remain, were fate to exile the rest of me from your presence forever. 
I love you more than I think I should. 
She is a friend of my mind. She gather me, man. The pieces I am, she gather them and give them back to me in all the right order. 
Don't leave a piece of jewelry at his house so you can go back and get it later; he may be with his real girlfriend. 
I've always loved you, and when you love someone, you love the whole person, just as he or she is, and not as you would like them to be. 
There is love in holding and there is love in letting go. 
Why is love intensified by absence? 
A thousand half-loves must be forsaken to take one whole heart home. 
The future for me is already a thing of the past - You were my first love and you will be my last 
Love makes you want to be a better man—right, right. But maybe love, real love, also gives you permission to just be the man you are. 
They do not love that do not show their love. 
How far should a person go in the name of true love? 
The love that moves the sun and the other stars. 
One ought to hold on to one's heart; for if one lets it go, one soon loses control of the head too. 
I'm gonna fight for you, until your heart stops beating. 
If I know what love is, it is because of you. 
Ah, what happiness it is to be with people who are all happy, to press hands, press cheeks, smile into eyes. 
Though lovers be lost, love shall not; And death shall have no dominion. 
I want to try making things right because picking up the pieces is way better than leaving them the way they are. 
If I could but know his heart, everything would become easy. 
And all I loved, I loved alone. 
I'm a little pencil in the hand of a writing God, who is sending a love letter to the world. 
If I were a tree, I would have no reason to love a human. 
Moving on is easy. It's staying moved on that's trickier. 
The power of finding beauty in the humblest things makes home happy and life lovely. 
But if I hadn't fallen, I wouldn't have met you. 
Let me die the moment my love dies. Let me not outlive my own capacity to love. Let me die still loving, and so, never die. 
Loving someone and having them love you back is the most precious thing in the world. 
Forever and ever, kid, until you're sick and tired of seeing me. 
Did I really want to stay on this road longer, knowing it was only going to end in devastation? 
Love is a serious mental disease. 
If you don't receive love from the ones who are meant to love you, you will never stop looking for it. 
To love someone means to see them as God intended them. 
Don’t sacrifice yourself too much, because if you sacrifice too much there’s nothing else you can give and nobody will care for you. 
Where there is great love, there are always miracles. 
to love is to destroy, and that to be loved is to be the one destroyed. 
Love is our true destiny. We do not find the meaning of life by ourselves alone - we find it with another. 
There are memories that time does not erase Forever does not make loss forgettable, only bearable. 
I miss him in so many ways, but right now I miss him in the way you always miss someone when you're single among a room full of couples. 
The story of life is quicker than the wink of an eye, the story of love is hello and goodbye until we meet again 
A fit, healthy body—that is the best fashion statement 
One of the things that makes me who I am is the loyalty I have to people I hold close to my heart. 
Then love knew it was called love. And when I lifted my eyes to your name, suddenly your heart showed me my way 
Christian, you are the state lottery, the cure for cancer, and the three wishes from Aladdin's lamp all rolled into one 
I wish you could be kissed, Jane,' he said. 'Because I would beg just one off you. Under all this.' He flailed an arm toward the stars. 
When you forgive, you love. And when you love, God’s light shines upon you. 
Love is the strangest, most illogical thing in the world. 
Sometimes it takes a heartbreak to shake us awake & help us see we are worth so much more than we're settling for. 
They're in love. Fuck the war. 
Woman is sacred; the woman one loves is holy. 
True love is the best thing in the world, except for cough drops. 
I have seen the best of you, and the worst of you, and I choose both. 
You’re just another story I can’t tell anymore. 
Actually that’s my secret — I can’t even talk about you to anybody because I don’t want any more people to know how wonderful you are. 
You’ll never be able to find yourself if you’re lost in someone else. 
People should fall in love with their eyes closed. 
Do not swear by the moon, for she changes constantly. then your love would also change. 
How far would you go to keep the hope of love alive? 
My heart only ever had one thought, one want. One need. Despite all, in spite of all All my heart has ever wanted is you. 
Love is scary: it changes; it can go away. That's the part of the risk. I don't want to be scared anymore. 
Choose your love. Love your choice. 
The only creatures that are evolved enough to convey pure love are dogs and infants. 
As lovers, the difference between men and women is that women can love all day long, but men only at times. 
Then I discovered that being related is no guarantee of love! 
It's the kind of kiss that inspires stars to climb into the sky and light up the world. 
Until one has loved an animal, a part of one's soul remains unawakened. 
And I wondered if love was too weak a word for what he felt, what he’d done for me. For what I felt for him. 
There is nothing that is going to make people hate you more, and love you more, than telling the truth. 
some moments are nice, some are nicer, some are even worth writing about. 
There could have been no two hearts so open, no tastes so similar, no feelings so in unison 
If you truly want to be respected by people you love, you must prove to them that you can survive without them. 
The only love that I really believe in is a mother’s love for her children. 
My soul sees its equal in you. 
he came to think, It surprised him that strangers didn't stop each other on the street to say 
You don’t take away my choices. You are my choice. 
I felt like an animal, and animals don’t know sin, do they? 
Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this. 
I find the best way to love someone is not to change them, but instead, help them reveal the greatest version of themselves. 
I wish you to know that you have been the last dream of my soul. 
Of all our games, love's play is the only one which threatens to unsettle the soul 
This is what happened in love. One of you cried a lot and then both of you grew sarcastic. 
you're an expert at sorry and keeping the lines blurry 
True love begins when nothing is looked for in return. 
I will follow you to the ends of the world. 
I can't set my hopes too high, 'Cause every hello ends with a goodbye. 
If you love something so much let it go. If it comes back it was meant to be; if it doesn't it never was 
When you love someone, its never over. You move on, because you have to but you take them with you in your heart 
A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words become superfluous. 
I don't want to hurt you or anybody so please forget about me. Just try. Find yourself a better friend. 
I am certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of the Imagination. 
I love her, and that's the beginning and end of everything. 
Limitless undying love which shines around me like a million suns it calls me on and on across the universe. 
What about when someone doesn't need a shoulder? What if they need the arms? 
Every woman wants a man who'll fall in love with her soul as well as her body. 
I love you,’ he whispered, and kissed my brow. ‘Thorns and all. 
The saddest thing about love, Joe, is that not only the love cannot last forever, but even the heartbreak is soon forgotten. 
If I have learned anything in this long life of mine, it is this: in love we find out who we want to be; in war we find out who we are. 
And yet,to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. 
With you, intimacy colours my voice. even ‘hello’ sounds like ‘come here'. 
Dare to love yourself as if you were a rainbow with gold at both ends. 
To fall in love with God is the greatest romance; to seek him the greatest adventure; to find him, the greatest human achievement. 
I love you enough to never make you choose. 
Wait. You think I'm going to die? That's why you slept with me? 
He loved her, of course, but better than that, he chose her, day after day. Choice: that was the thing. 
So don't you worry your pretty little mind because people throw rocks at things that shine. [Ours] 
For it was not into my ear you whispered, but into my heart. It was not my lips you kissed, but my soul. 
When is a monster not a monster? Oh, when you love it. 
You may choose to look the other way but you can never say again that you did not know. 
Love meant jumping off a cliff and trusting that a certain person would be there to catch you at the bottom. 
Amor Fati – “Love Your Fate”, which is in fact your life. 
Would you destroy Something perfect in order to make it beautiful? 
Of course he loves me. I’m his sister.” “Blood isn’t love,” said Magnus, and his voice was bitter. 
Love one another, but make not a bond of love: Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls. 
Sometimes we love with nothing more than hope. Sometimes we cry with everything except tears. 
Adam smiled cheerily. Ronan would start wars and burn cities for that true smile, elastic and amiable. 
When you love someone, you don't have a choice. Love takes your choices away. - Clary Fray 
We’d met at a carefree time, a moment full of promise, in its place now were the harsh lessons of the real world. 
When he died, all things soft and beautiful and bright would be buried with him. 
You were you, and I was I; we were two before our time. I was yours before I knew, and you have always been mine too. 
Missing someone, they say, is self-centered. I self-center you more than ever. 
The way you walk, way you talk, way you say my name; it's beautiful, wonderful, don't you ever change. 
Until this moment, I had not realized that someone could break your heart twice, along the very same fault lines. 
To the world you may be one person but to one person you may be the world. 
If you could only love enough, you could be the most powerful person in the world. 
I drive around the streets an inch away from weeping, ashamed of my sentimentality and possible love. 
Don't ever think I fell for you, or fell over you. I didn't fall in love, I rose in it. 
When people fall in love, they burst into flames. 
Even on my weakest days I get a little bit stronger 
I don't care if you danced naked on the roof of the Little Palace with him. I love you, Alina, even the part of you that loved him. 
I didn't want to kiss you goodbye — that was the trouble — I wanted to kiss you good night — and there's a lot of difference. 
Neither love nor evil conquers all, but evil cheats more. 
One should always be in love. That's the reason one should never marry. 
How could I have ever been ashamed of loving Dante Quintana? 
Did you think you could stop me? I'll burn the world down to save her. 
A heart filled with anger has no room for love. 
There was beauty in the idea of freedom, but it was an illusion. Every human heart was chained by love. 
So I placed my heart under lock and key To take some time, and take care of me But I turn around and you're standing here 
Love is not a maybe thing, you know when you love someone. 
Love wins, love always wins. 
…There is the heat of Love, the pulsing rush of Longing, the lover’s whisper, irresistible—magic to make the sanest man go mad. 
I am no longer in love with her, that's certain, but maybe I love her. Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
When you love you wish to do things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve. 
Would he find her? Without question. Would he save her? Always. 
If two people love each other there can be no happy end to it. 
A man can be happy with any woman as long as he does not love her. 
Each time you happen to me all over again. 
Failed relationships can be described as so much wasted make-up. 
I don't like it when I outweigh my men. 
And I can fight only for something that I love, love only what I respect, and respect only what I at least know. 
You cannot be with someone just because you don’t want to hurt him. You have your own happiness to think about. 
Most of us must learn to love people and use things rather than loving things and using people. 
I'll find you. There is no place in this world you can hide from me. I'm watching. Love, Dimitri 
The fact is…I’m in love with you, and I have been for some time. 
To love is to recognize yourself in another. 
Yes it wasn't over, it still isn't over. 
Last time I saw you, I said that it hurt too much to love you. But I was wrong about that. The truth is it hurts too much not to love you. 
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man swear he loves me. 
You can live your whole life not realizing that what you're looking for is right in front of you. 
Oh, love isn't there to make us happy. I believe it exists to show us how much we can endure. 
A busy, vibrant, goal-oriented woman is so much more attractive than a woman who waits around for a man to validate her existence. 
You had to know a person well to make them laugh like that. 
I want you to be weak. As weak as I am. 
And you can't love, not fully, unless you are loved in return. 
Ultimately, it is the desire, not the desired, that we love. 
The truest form of love is how you behave toward someone, not how you feel about them. 
Love is worth everything. Everything. 
I love you more than I hate everything else. 
Then he made one last effort to search in his heart for the place where his affection had rotted away, and he could not find it. 
i am a museum full of art but you had your eyes shut 
I'm the kind of boy that can fall in love with any girl because I love with the heart, not the eyes. 
If having a soul means being able to feel love and loyalty and gratitude, then animals are better off than a lot of humans. 
Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. 
Just because I'm not forever by your side doesn't mean that's not precisely where I want to be. 
Work without love is slavery. 
I threw myself into that fire, threw myself into it, into him, and let myself burn. 
If a man hasn't what's necessary to make a woman love him, it's his fault, not hers. 
Your naked body should only belong to those who fall in love with your naked soul. 
He was contemplation and enthusiasm. Ambition and strong coffee. I could have looked at him forever. 
Love, when spelled backwards and read phonetically, reads evil 
Love, like fire, goes out without fuel. 
And in the end, we were all just humans.. drunk on the idea that love, only love, could heal our brokenness. 
The Simple Path Silence is Prayer Prayer is Faith Faith is Love Love is Service The Fruit of Service is Peace 
Statistically speaking, there is a 65 percent chance that the love of your life is having an affair. Be very suspicious. 
There comes a time in your life when you have to choose to turn the page, write another book or simply close it. 
There can be no deep disappointment where there is not deep love. 
Now I'd rather be infected with love for the tiniest sliver of a second than live a hundred years smothered by a lie. 
Love consists of not looking each other in the eye, but of looking outwardly in the same direction. 
She's my kitten, and no one else's. 
Love is the strongest force the world possesses and yet it is the humblest imaginable. 
You were the sun, and I was crashing into you. 
Why is there ever this perverse cruelty in humankind, that makes us hurt most those we love best? 
When you feel someone else's pain and joy as powerfully as if it were your own, then you know you really loved them. 
But you're the only one, Scarlet. You'll always be the only one. 
If you love deeply, you're going to get hurt badly. But it's still worth it. 
Love is always open arms. If you close your arms about love you will find that you are left holding only yourself. 
Love is a promise, love is a souvenir, once given never forgotten, never let it disappear. 
i carry your heart with me(i carry it in my heart) 
Often it is the most deserving people who cannot help loving those who destroy them. 
To love is to suffer and there can be no love otherwise. 
It is a defect of God's humor that he directs our hearts everywhere but to those who have a right to them. 
Everybody is a main character to someone 
Every normal man must be tempted, at times, to spit on his hands, hoist the black flag, and begin slitting throats. 
The minute I stopped trying to find the right girl, and started trying to become the right guy the girl came. 
I feel like a part of my soul has loved you since the beginning of everything. Maybe we’re from the same star. 
We ate well and cheaply and drank well and cheaply and slept well and warm together and loved each other. 
You will never be able to escape from your heart. So it's better to listen to what it has to say. 
Unrequited love is the infinite curse of a lonely heart. 
Don't worry about hurting me, if that's what you're afraid of. I want to get hurt. At least I´ll feel something for a change. 
All of sudden, this shooting star went by, and all I could think was that they were listening to us somehow. 
She had loved him for such a long time, she thought. How was it that she did now know him at all? 
You were the missing piece of my soul, the breath in my lungs, and the blood in my veins. 
Life is a gift. Don't forget to live it. 
This I want to believe implicitly: Man was born for love and revolution. 
I knew I loved you before I met you I think I dreamed you into life I knew I loved you before I met you I have been waiting all my life 
How can something so wrong feel so right? 
I have so much in me, and the feeling for her absorbs it all; I have so much, and without her it all comes to nothing. 
He loved her for almost everything she was & she decided that was enough to let him stay for a very long time. 
He looked so lost, so soulful, so lonely. I wanted him to kiss me now. I wanted to let him know I was his for all eternity. 
Surely it was a good way to die, in the place of someone else, someone I loved. 
Only time can heal your broken heart. Just as only time can heal his broken arms and legs. 
What I cannot love, I overlook. 
There is no time for cut-and-dried monotony. There is time for work. And time for love. That leaves no other time. 
Make me into anything, but just love me. 
Sometimes I feel like we're a knot, too tangled to be taken apart. 
No matter where it is in the sky No matter where you are in the world the moon is never bigger than your thumb. -John 
If you love me as you say you do,' she whispered, 'make it so that I am at peace. 
If you cannot inspire a woman with love of you, fill her above the brim with love of herself ~ all that runs over will be yours. 
You looove me. (holds out arms) You love me this much. 
Would you mind repeating that? I'm afraid I might have lost my wits altogether and just hallucinated what I've longed to hear. 
Autumn is the hardest season. The leaves are all falling, and they're falling like they're falling in love with the ground. 
Close your eyes and I'll kiss you, Tomorrow I'll miss you. 
The first time he'd held her hand, it felt so good that it crowded out all the bad things. It felt better than anything had ever hurt. 
Every time I think I'm missing a piece of me, you give it back. 
Let us always meet each other with smile, for the smile is the beginning of love. 
That's when you know for sure somebody loves you. They figure out what you need and they give it to you -- without you asking. 
A mighty pain to love it is, And 't is a pain that pain to miss; But of all pains, the greatest pain It is to love, but love in vain. 
When God knows you're ready for the responsibility of commitment, He'll reveal the right person under the right circumstances. 
They've got no idea what happiness is, they don't know that without this love there is no happiness or unhappiness for us--there is no life. 
Being in love, I find myself smiling for no reason at all 
If you love someone but rarely make yourself available to him or her, that is not true love. 
Love is too precious to be ashamed of. 
These pictures are my heart. And if my heart was a canvas, every square inch of it would be painted over with you. 
Loving someone is giving them the power to break your heart, but trusting them not to. 
Love is a striking example of how little reality means to us. 
We come to love not by finding a perfect person, but by learning to see an imperfect person perfectly. 
For women, the best aphrodisiacs are words. The G-spot is in the ears. He who looks for it below there is wasting his time. 
The heart can think of no devotion Greater than being shore to the ocean- Holding the curve of one position, Counting an endless repetition. 
Who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make love known? 
She's mad, but she's magic. There's no lie in her fire. 
If you love someone, you must be prepared to set them free. 
Love cannot be forced, love cannot be coaxed and teased. It comes out of heaven, unasked and unsought. 
Absence makes the heart grow fonder, but it sure makes the rest of you lonely. 
Hope for love, pray for love, wish for love, dream for love…but don’t put your life on hold waiting for love. 
The more boys I meet the more I love my dog. 
I think you're still the only person sharp enough to sharpen someone like me. 
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. O, that I were a glove upon that hand That I might touch that cheek! 
I mean, it's not surprising, really. Once you love something, you always love it in some way. You have to. It's, like, part of you for good. 
He was the toast to her butter. 
In all the world, there is no heart for me like yours. In all the world, there is no love for you like mine. 
Like some wines our love could neither mature nor travel. 
Love is not a habit, a commitment, or a debt. It isn't what romantic songs tell us it is - love simply is. 
Plant seeds of happiness, hope, success, and love; it will all come back to you in abundance. This is the law of nature. 
and when all the wars are over, a butterfly will still be beautiful. 
I don't remember who said this, but there really are places in the heart you don't even know exist until you love a child. 
Tears are words the heart can't express 
My head’ll explode if I continue with this escapism. 
If you aren't the woman I think you are, then this isn't the world I thought it was. 
Wanting him to come back before anyone notices part of the world has not moved since he left. 
I think you can only be truly mad at someone you really love. 
Those whom we most love are often the most alien to us. 
The words ‘I Love You’ kill, and resurrect millions, in less than a second. 
I don't understand the point of being together if you're not the happiest. 
You who suffer because you love, love still more. To die of love, is to live by it. 
Love is illogical, love had consequences--I did this to myself, and I should be able to take it. 
Sometimes two people have to fall apart, to realize how much they need to fall back together. 
I got my heart's desire, and there my troubles began. 
Every life has one true love snapshot. 
Sweets to the sweet. 
Never forget that justice is what love looks like in public. 
Love God and He will enable you to love others even when they disappoint you. 
Someone once wrote that a novel should deliver a series of small astonishments. I get the same thing spending an hour with you. 
You can love a person dear to you with a human love, but an enemy can only be loved with divine love. 
Absence is to love what wind is to fire; it extinguishes the small, it inflames the great. 
I imagine a line, a white line, painted on the sand and on the ocean, from me to you. 
Know that love is truly timeless. 
Even when I'm dead, I'll swim through the Earth, like a mermaid of the soil, just to be next to your bones. 
Freely we serve Because we freely love, as in our will To love or not; in this we stand or fall. 
Relationships are all about trust and equality. If one person shares, then the other person should share, too. 
The opposite of love is not hate, its apathy, when you simply don't bother about that person! 
That night when you kissed me, I left a poem in your mouth, and you can hear some of the lines every time you breathe out. 
Love who you love while you have them. That's all you can do. Let them go when you must. If you know how to love, you'll never run out. 
Where you go, I shall go; where you die, I shall die, and there will I be buried. 
Love makes us such fools. 
Love's gift cannot be given, it waits to be accepted. 
Hate is It's too easy. Love. Love takes courage. 
Why, darling, I don't live at all when I'm not with you. 
A friend of mine once defined love as finding someone you can talk to late into the night 
I have always found that actively loving saves one from a morbid preoccupation with the shortcomings of society. 
We're all golden sunflowers inside. 
What do I care how 'e looks? I am good-looking enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show is zat my husband is brave! 
Love is like breathing. You take it in and let it out. 
Love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared to love in dreams. 
Two things you will never have to chase: True friends & true love. 
A woman should soften but not weaken a man. 
A weed is but an unloved flower. 
I'm guilty of giving people more chances than they deserve but when I'm done, I'm done. 
Those we love never truly leave us, Harry. There are things that death cannot touch. 
When it comes to men, deal with them as they are, not how you’d like them to be. 
But the you who you are tonight is the same you I was in love with yesterday, the same you I’ll be in love with tomorrow. 
Nobody ever gets what they want when it comes to love. 
After all, my erstwhile dear, My no longer cherished, Need we say it was not love, Just because it perished? 
And yet another moral occurs to me now: Make love when you can. It's good for you. 
Your kids require you most of all to love them for who they are, not to spend your whole time trying to correct them. 
I do love nothing in the world so well as you- is not that strange? 
It’s strange how dreams get under your skin and give your heart a test for what’s real and what’s imaginary. 
It is better to lose your pride with someone you love rather than to lose that someone you love with your useless pride. 
Do you really think anyone in this world, compares to you in my eyes? 
Submission is not about authority and it is not obedience; it is all about relationships of love and respect. 
Cut the ending. Revise the script. The man of her dreams is a girl. 
You are the most important thing to me now. The most important thing to me ever. 
It ought to make us feel ashamed when we talk like we know what we're talking about when we talk about love. 
Would you rather live one perfect day over and over or live your life with no perfect days but just decent ones? 
I love you because no two snowflakes are alike, and it is possible, if you stand tippy-toe, to walk between the raindrops. 
Stronger than lover's love is lover's hate. Incurable, in each, the wounds they make. 
I don't want to be somebody's crush. If somebody likes me, I want them to like the real me, not what they think I am. 
If equal affection cannot be, Let the more loving one be me. 
Five minutes are enough to dream a whole life, that is how relative time is. 
How could I be sleeping with this particular man . Surely only true love could justify my lack of taste. 
It's so much easier to convince yourself you're madly in love with someone when you know nothing about him. 
twice I have lived forever in a smile 
It was the nicest thing she could imagine. It made her want to have his babies and give him both of her kidneys. 
When you like someone, you like them in spite of their faults. When you love someone, you love them with their faults. 
I'm backing down now. I really do love you. That's why I'm doing this. 
Heart, we will forget him, You and I, tonight! You must forget the warmth he gave, I will forget the light. 
People wait around too long for love. I'm happy with all of my lusts! 
You honestly expect me to breathe in a world without air? 
Kiss a lover, Dance a measure, Find your name And buried treasure. Face your life, It's pain, It's pleasure, Leave no path untaken. 
It hurts to breathe. It hurts to live. I hate her, yet I do not think I can exist without her. 
You get use to someone—start to like them, even—and they leave. In the end, everyone leaves. 
We are not people who touch each other carelessly; every point of contact between us feels important, a rush of energy and relief. 
A kiss on the beach when there is a full moon is the closest thing to heaven. 
Deep in her heart, she wasn't sure she deserved to be happy, nor did she believe that she was worthy of someone who seemed normal. 
I love you, in my mind where my thoughts reside, in my heart where my emotions live, and in my soul where my dreams are born. I love you. 
What if love wasn't the act of finding what you were missing but the give-and-take that made you both match? 
It's one thing to fall in love. It's another to feel someone else fall in love with you, and to feel a responsibility toward that love. 
When someone blushes, doesn't that mean 'yes'? 
I don't think you can define love. 
My girlfriend is sad and quiet and keeps me up all night worrying about her. 
It's hard to love a woman and do anything. 
This time I wouldn't forget him, because I couldn't ever forgive him - for breaking my heart twice. 
I'm sorry. I know you loved her. It was hard not to. 
I want someone whose heart is big enough to hold me. 
I crossed a thousand leagues to come to you, and lost the best part of me along the way. Don't tell me to leave. 
Well my music was different in high school; I was singing about love—you know, things I don't care about anymore. 
Physical love is unthinkable without violence. 
If a writer falls in love with you, you can never die. 
I love you so much that nothing can matter to me - not even you Only my love- not your answer. Not even your indifference 
I never want to be away from you again, except at work, in the restroom or when one of us is at a movie the other does not want to see. 
You know that when I hate you, it is because I love you to a point of passion that unhinges my soul. 
The problem with marriage is that it ends every night after making love, and it must be rebuilt every morning before breakfast. 
If you have the woman you love, what more do you need? Well, besides an alibi for the time of her husband’s murder. 
You're like a grey sky. You're beautiful, even though you don't want to be. 
I have been loving you a little more every minute since this morning. 
I believe in love the verb, not the noun. 
I love you and it's getting worse. 
There will never be no love at all. 
Love is honesty. Love is a mutual respect for one another. 
There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart. 
She did not believe he could have really gone, because for her, to leave the person you loved was impossible. 
He offered her the world. She said she had her own. 
The center hold.” “How do you know?” “Because we are the center. 
The right thing at the wrong tme is the wrong thing. 
Love is a rebellious bird that nobody can tame. 
A best friend is the only one that walks into your life when the world has walked out. 
I don't let nobody see me wishin' he was mine 
Those who really love you don't mean to hurt you and if they do, you can't see it in their eyes but it hurts them too. 
People die, I think, but your relationship with them doesn't. It continues and is ever-changing. 
As the light begins to intensify, so does my misery, and I wonder how it is possible to hurt so much when nothing is wrong. 
We are not held back by the love we didn't receive in the past, but by the love we're not extending in the present. 
I'm in love with you, and I'm not in the business of denying myself the simple pleasure of saying true things. 
I need the thing that happens when your brain shuts off and your heart turns on. 
Love is a snowmobile racing across the tundra and then suddenly it flips over, pinning you underneath. At night, the ice weasels come. 
Don't marry a rich man. Marry a good man. He will spend his life trying to keep you happy. No rich man can buy that! 
You say you’re ? Sure that you’re in love? How can you know it? You think love is so simple? 
When you know my love, my love will warm you. 
Love is—a shade of what I feel. 
What if I were smiling and running into your arms? Would you see then what I see now? 
A warrior does not give up what he loves, he finds the love in what he does 
If you have it [love], you don't need to have anything else, and if you don't have it, it doesn't matter much what else you have. 
Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy to a friend. 
Remember. The way you make love is the way God will be with you. 
Every day People straighten up the hair, why not the heart? 
Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my folly. 
I couldn't stand here, hanging on, when the very thing I held disappeared more with each passing day. 
The Heart wants what it wants - or else it does not care 
Wisdom is knowing I am nothing, Love is knowing I am everything, and between the two my life moves. 
Hatred would have been easier. With hatred, I would have known what to do. Hatred is clear, metallic, one-handed, unwavering; unlike love. 
A man in love can do extraordinary things, I don’t care if you’re an angel, you’re my angel, and I won’t let you go. 
It shattered something inside me that hadn't been broken before. 
A truth should exist, it should not be used like this. If I love you is that a fact or a weapon? 
You have my whole heart. You always did. 
Love is a possible strength in an actual weakness. 
Why are they all high-calorie foods? 
I believe in the immeasurable power of love; that true love can endure any circumstance and reach across any distance. 
Yearning for love made her feel like a cat that was always twining around ankles, meowing 
That’s love: Two lonely persons keep each other safe and touch each other and talk to each other. 
And I'm dying to know, is it killing you like it's killing me? And the story of us looks a lot like a tragedy now. 
They are orphans again, with no true home but each other and whatever life they can make together on the other side of the sea. 
One of the best times for figuring out who you are & what you really want out of life? Right after a break-up. 
I wanted to be his life preserver, the thing that would keep him afloat. Instead, he became my anchor. And I’m tired of drowning. 
Men build too many walls and not enough bridges. 
The truth was, he now belonged only to my past, and it was time I begin to accept it, as much as it hurt to do so. 
If love is blind, then maybe a blind person that loves has a greater understanding of it. 
I just looked at her, feeling utterly empty. I didn’t know what I was supposed to say to her. 
I would lay down everything I possess, even my soul, for you. If that isn't love, it's the best I have. 
He was too perfect, despite being one of the most imperfect people I knew. 
If it weren't for music, I would think that love is mortal. 
When you fish for love, bait with your heart, not your brain. 
She was the kind of girlfriend God gives you young, so you'll know loss the rest of your life. 
Just because love don't look the way you think it should, don't mean you don't have it. 
But why, why, why can't people just say what they mean? 
Perfect love is the most beautiful of all frustrations because it is more than one can express. 
I cannot compromise my respect for your love. You can keep your love, I will keep my respect. 
Before I fell in love with words, with setting skies and singing birds— it was you I fell in love with first. 
Love takes off the masks we fear we cannot live without and know we cannot live within. 
Sometimes good things fall apart, so better things can fall together. 
God turns you from one feeling to another and teaches by means of opposites so that you will have two wings to fly, not one 
And the story of love is a long sad tale ending in graves. 
You might be looking for reasons but there are no reasons. 
This thing about you that you think is your flaw - it's the reason I'm falling in love with you. 
Whoever loves becomes humble. Those who love have , so to speak , pawned a part of their narcissism. 
Ever since time began, people have recognized their true Love by the light in their eyes. 
Love is the most powerful force in the world. That love can do anything. 
What is love? two souls and one flesh; friendship? two bodies and one soul. 
People do the damndest things when they’re in love. 
We are asleep until we fall in Love! 
Can't you see? Every step I have taken, since I was that child on the bridge, has been to bring myself closer to you. 
Nothing else wounds so deeply and irreparably. Nothing else robs us of hope so much as being unloved by one we love 
He was afraid of defiling the love which filled his soul. 
Don't be reckless with other people's hearts. Don't put up with people who are reckless with yours. 
True beauty is something that attacks, overpowers, robs, and finally destroys. 
And if you couldn't be loved, the next best thing was to be let alone. 
How could you go about choosing something that would hold the half of your heart you had to bury? 
My shoulder will never be the same. I expect you to nurse me back to health. 
Looking at beauty in the world, is the first step of purifying the mind. 
Love is hard to find, hard to keep, and hard to forget. 
Define yourself radically as one beloved by God. This is the true self. Every other identity is illusion. 
The first stab of love is like a sunset, a blaze of color -- oranges, pearly pinks, vibrant purples 
He is ugly and sad but he is all love. 
Learn to deal with the fact that you are not a perfect person but you are a person that deserves respect and honesty. 
Love those you hate you. 
If I had a camera,' I said, 'I'd take a picture of you every day. That way I'd remember how you looked every single day of your life. 
The only way of knowing a person is to love them without hope. 
Better than chocolate, being with you last night. Silly me, I thought that nothing was better than chocolate. 
Living simply makes loving simple. 
Love is a state in which a man sees things most decidedly as they are not. 
Love is so unpredictable. That's what makes it so great. 
Love the trees until their leaves fall off, then encourage them to try again next year. 
Physics isn't the most important thing. Love is. 
No matter what, nobody can take away the dances you've already had. 
And Max, the king of all wild things, was lonely and wanted to be where someone loved him best of all. 
Your absence has not taught me to be alone, it merely has shown that when together we cast a single shadow on the wall. 
Why is the measure of love loss? 
Who said I can't wear my Converse With my dress, well baby That's just me! 
I believe that every single event in life happens in an opportunity to choose love over fear. 
Be worthy love, and love will come. 
You are my butterfly and refuse to set you free. 
I am two fools, I know, For loving, and for saying so. 
My love is pizza shaped. Won’t you have a slice? It’s circular, so there’s enough to go around. 
love is the sum of our choices, the strength of our commitments, the ties that bind us together. 
In love, one and one are one. 
I come here with no expectations, only to profess, now that I am at liberty to do so, that my heart is and always will be yours. 
For she had eyes and chose me. 
None of us can choose where we shall love 
Tell me then, does love make one a fool or do only fools fall in love? 
Remembering. Forgetting. I'm not sure which is worse. 
Right now we are here, and nothing can mar our perfection, or steal the joy of this perfect moment. 
Loving's pretty easy. It's letting someone love you that's hard. 
They said that love was terrifying and tender, wild and sweet, and none of it made any sense. But now I knew that every mad word was true. 
No man is offended by another man's admiration of the woman he loves; it is the woman only who can make it a torment. 
I'd rather die on my own terms than live on theirs. I'd rather die loving Alex than live without him. 
Friendship is selfless love, care, respect, and honor not a profitable opportunity. 
Fight for the only thing she knew was good enough, noble enough, powerful enough to be worth risking everything Love. 
The most confused you will ever get is when you try to convince your heart and spirit of something your mind knows is a lie. 
But everyone disappears, no matter who loves them. 
You are protected, in short, by your ability to love! 
Hearts Live By Being Wounded 
The more you are motivated by Love, The more Fearless & Free your action will be. 
He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he ended and she began. 
The language of love letters is the same as suicide notes. 
Nothing in life is worth, turning your back on, if you love it. 
Love is illogical. You fall into it like a manhole. Then you're just stuck. You die in love more than you live in love. 
Eternity is in love with the productions of time. 
Almost all the time, you tell yourself you're loving somebody when you're just using them. This only looks like love. 
Love as thou wilt 
I haven't had that one great love, which is good. I don't want that to be in the past, I want it to be in the future. 
Love simply is. 
Love is not blind; that is the last thing that it is. Love is bound; and the more it is bound the less it is blind. 
Their fingers seemed to fit together in just the right way- effortlessly clasped,like perfect complements. 
Can't you just like a girl who likes you back?' 'None of them likes me back. I may as well like the one I really want. 
But, my God, it's so beautiful when the boy smiles 
You can never be wise and be in love at the same time. 
And maybe that was love. Being so vulnerable and allowing someone else in so far they could hurt you, but they also give you everything. 
But whatever However Whenever this ends I want you to know That right now I love you forever 
I love you, Marks. My heart is completely and utterly yours. And unfortunately for you, the rest of me comes with it. 
Love: the sickest of Irony’s sick jokes. The place where logic and order go to die. 
I feel like I’ve been split open and stuffed with sunshine. 
There are some experiences in life they haven't invented the right words for. 
I’m a fake fact factory. The things I make are the things I make up. Also, as a side business, I make love. Actually, I just made that up. 
Sometimes I get real lonely sleeping with you. 
Our love was a two-person game. At least until one of us died, and the other became a murderer. 
Truth without love is brutality, and love without truth is hypocrisy. 
I had to touch you with my hands, I had to taste you with my tongue; one can't love and do nothing. 
She was bendable light: she shone around every corner of my day. 
All the problem of women, starts with men. All the problem of men, ends with women. 
What's your heart telling you to do? I don't know.' Maybe, you're trying too hard to hear it. 
Nothing had changed. I was the stupid one again. I was the girl who never understood who she was to people. 
One's life has value so long as one attributes value to the life of others, by means of love, friendship, and compassion 
Soul meets soul on lovers lips. 
Love is not finding someone to live with. It's finding someone you can't live without. 
But hurry, let's entwine ourselves as one, our mouth broken, our soul bitten by love, so time discovers us safely destroyed. 
Zen masters say you cannot see your reflection in running water, only in still water. 
Find the things that matter, and hold on to them, and fight for them, and refuse to let them go. 
You know that I could as soon forget you as my existence! 
We all have an old knot in the heart we wish to untie. 
I make love with a focus and intensity that most people reserve for sleep. 
Westley: This is true love — you think this happens every day? 
Love may forgive all infirmities and love still in spite of them: but Love cannot cease to will their removal. 
Love is a drama of contradictions. 
He experienced the singular pleasure of watching people he loved fall in love with other people he loved. 
Friendship often ends in love. But love in friendship; never. 
Love is just a word until someone comes along and gives it meaning. 
Everything I know, I know because of love. 
The greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and be loved in return. 
You smiled and talked to me of nothing and I felt that for this I had been waiting long. 
If we’re going to kiss, it has to be book-worthy. 
The thing with your heart's desire is that your heart doesn't even know what it desires until it turns up. 
One rarely falls in love without being as much attracted to what is interestingly wrong with someone as what is objectively healthy. 
For which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me? 
Real friendship or love is not manufactured or achieved by an act of will or intention. Friendship is always an act of recognition. 
They say: 'If a man knew himself, he would know all mankind.' I say: 'If a man loved mankind, he would know something of himself. 
The worst thing you can do if you miss or need someone is let them know it. 
Love comes with a knife, not some shy question, and not with fears for its reputation! 
I think Heaven will be like a first kiss. 
People who love themselves, don’t hurt other people. The more we hate ourselves, the more we want others to suffer. 
Love is an endless mystery, because there is no reasonable cause that could explain it. 
Love! Love until the night collapses! 
Love is a trap. When it appears, we see only its light, not its shadows. 
The moment our lips met, I knew with pure and piercing certainty that I would have waited for him forever. 
It’s hard to communicate anything exactly and that’s why perfect relationships between people are difficult to find. 
Dexter, I love you so much. So, so much, and I probably always will. I just don't like you anymore. I'm sorry. 
You can’t leave yet. I’m not finished falling in love with you. 
It takes great courage to see the world in all its tainted glory, and still to love it. And even more courage to see it in the one you love 
Love lasts about seven years. That's how long it takes for the cells of the body to totally replace themselves. 
We wanted the freedom to love. We wanted the freedom to choose. Now we have to fight for it. 
She put one hand on mine. “When someone is in your heart, they’re never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
You had to be willing to fight in order for a love story to last a life time. 
If I had a single flower for every time I think about you, I could walk forever in my garden. 
Stains are even worse when you're the only one who can see them. 
Love is when the other person's happiness is more important than your own. 
When you leave, weary of me, without a word I shall gently let you go. 
No matter how bad your heart is broken, the world doesn't stop for your grief. 
It's usually the selfish people who are loved the most. They do what you deny yourself, and you love them for it. You give them your heart. 
I didn't know love could leave the lights on all the time. 
Everyone's a little crazy. Some people just hide it better than others. 
May you live as long as you wish and love as long as you live. 
That kind of love should've been able to beat sickness. That kind of love should've conquered anything. 
True love is born from understanding. 
If you didn't remember something happening, was it because it never had happened? Or because you wished it hadn't? 
I will be with her again, or I will die. There aren’t any other options 
Take my hand and we'll make it - I swear 
She asked if I loved another woman, so I answered honestly and said, “Dinner was great, but I could go for dessert. 
some people fall in love over and over again while some people can only do it once. 
I'm beginning to think that maybe it's not just how much you love someone. Maybe what matters is who you are when you're with them. 
No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight. 
Self-talk reflects your innermost feelings. 
If you press me to say why I loved him, I can say no more than because he was he, and I was I. 
The question, love, is whether you want me enough to take the risk. 
In the absence of love, we began slowly but surely to fall apart. 
Real museums are places where Time is transformed into Space. 
But you cant shut everyone out. I mean you have to have someone to lovesomeone to hold on to someone-- 
How 'bout a shot of truth in that denial cocktail. 
I hold it true, whate'er befall; I feel it when I sorrow most; 'Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
My love is meatloaf flavored. I just wish my meatloaf was also meatloaf flavored. 
If I could bronze my love, it’d be worthy of a silver medal. 
And I didn't choose it, Kat. I chose you. 
Do not allow me to forget you 
He brought out the worst in me, and was the best thing that ever happened to me. 
Maybe you could be mine / or maybe we’ll be entwined / aimless in this sexless foreplay. 
If you love me, Henry, you don’t love me in a way I understand. 
Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. 
Love comforteth like sunshine after rain. 
If I were rain, That joins sky and earth that otherwise never touch, Could I join two hearts as well? 
I might kiss you. I might be bad at it. That's not possible. 
Everything that happens to you matters to me. 
I'm like a starving man who has been given food. Maybe he's cold, and his clothes are torn, and he's ashamed, but he's not unhappy. 
We live in a dark and romantic and quite tragic world. 
In a universe of ambiguity, this kind of certainty comes only once, and never again, no matter how many lifetimes you live. 
Happiness is part of who we are. Joy is the feeling 
Gamble everything for love, if you're a true human being. 
Nobody knows you. You don't know yourself. And I, who am half in love with you, What am I in love with? My own imaginings? 
You can be in love and you can be in a relationship. But they’re not always the same thing. 
I could’ve sworn I was telling the truth when I told you I didn’t miss you. 
When we are in love, we are convinced nobody else will do. But as time goes, others do do, and often do do, much much better. 
I know I’m not supposed to say this, but I love you. 
The heart of man is very much like the sea, it has its storms, it has its tides and in its depths it has its pearls too 
I was his exception, and as much as I had tried to fight my feelings, he was mine. 
Two minds with but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one. 
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood. 
Love is like a virus. It can happen to anybody at any time. 
That this girl would know exactly how to shatter me. 
I once loved a girl who almost loved me, but not as much as she loved John Cusack. 
A man is lucky if he is the first love of a woman. A woman is lucky if she is the last love of a man. 
I like being the girl nobody can have. 
Every life needs a little space. It leaves room for good things to enter it. 
Perhaps watching someone you love suffer can teach you even more than suffering yourself can. 
A real relationship is two-way. 
If love is like a possession, maybe my letter are like my exorcisms 
It is very difficult to live among people you love and hold back from offering them advice. 
Loving someone always requires you to not love others. 
When male authors write love stories, the heroine tends to end up dead. 
Emotion without reason lets people walk all over you; reason without emotion is a mask for cruelty. 
You don't need to justify your love, you don't need to explain your love, you just need to practice your love. Practice creates the master. 
Everything is clearer when you're in love. 
You might as well make yourself fly as to make yourself love. 
There's only one thing that can heal the heart Only one It's love, Gaara. 
Love is a combination of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect and trust. 
how sad and bad and mad it was - but then, how it was sweet 
But you've slipped under my skin, invaded my blood and seized my heart. 
Love only grows by sharing. You can only have more for yourself by giving it away to others. 
Love is keeping the promise anyway. 
If music be the food of love, play on. 
I haven’t been very impressed lately. By people, or places, or the way someone said he loved me and then slowly changed his mind. 
You stay safe, You love. You survive. You laugh and cry and struggle and sometimes you fail and sometimes you succeed. You Push. 
People Die Beauty Fades Love Changes And You Will Always Be Alone 
To wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect 
I love you, even if there isn’t any me, or any love, or even any life. I love you. 
about her has to do with me. 
But you're so busy changing the world Just one smile can change all of mine 
Only in the agony of parting do we look into the depths of love. 
I want him to see the flowers in my eyes and hear the songs in my hands. 
You're my Star, a stargazer too, and I wish that I were Heaven, with a billion eyes to look at you! 
Is it possible not to ever know your type-not to even know you have a type-until quite suddenly you do? 
I love you not only for what you are, but for what I am when I am with you 
Isn't hate merely the result of wounded love? 
We should love, not fall in love, because everything that falls, gets broken. 
For love is no part of the dreamworld. Love belongs to Desire, and Desire is always cruel. 
The best use of life is love. The best expression of love is time. The best time to love is now. 
You are what happiness means to me. And I would rather have today with you than forever with anyone else. 
Why did he have to be so gorgeous? Why did he have to stand so close, and why did I still love him so much? 
You have to be very fond of men. Very, very fond. You have to be very fond of them to love them. Otherwise they're simply unbearable. 
There is love of course. And then there's life, its enemy. 
To love is easy, to be in a relationship is extremely difficult. 
You know what the secret is? It's so simple. We love one another. We're nice to one another. Do you know how rare that is? - Carmen 
I really don't even know you, and yet, in my life, you are forever entangled; to my history, inextricably bound. 
When you love you should not think you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
Maybe sometimes we can only see the truth about ourselves if someone shows us where to look. 
The heart is a strange beast and not ruled by logic. 
Every time I close my eyes, it's like a dark paradise. No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight 
No matter how much you love someone, you still want to have you own way. 
What barrier is there that love cannot break? 
Have you ever felt the longing for someone you could admire? For something, not to look down at, but up to? 
I feel…and I have reason to believe…that we could come to mean something to each other. 
You don’t need scores of suitors. You need only one… if he’s the right one. 
But what can be done, the one who loves must share the fate of the one he loves. 
Get up, Shahrzad al-Khayzuran. You kneel before no one. Least of all me. 
Say it,” I gritted out. “The High Lord of the Night Court is your mate. 
She let out a laugh, and then she put her hand over her mouth, like she was angry at herself for forgetting her sadness. 
Often you don't know whether a woman is friend, enemy or lover until it is too late. Sometimes, she is all three. 
To make one person the center of your world is bound to end in disaster. There are too many factors outside your control. 
Love without sacrifice is like theft 
When all is said and done, the weather and love are the two elements about which one can never be sure. 
Are those the only options? Nothing or forever? 
What sexual preference do you hope she has?” “Happiness.” Isnt that cool? 
Tucker: Why would you tell me now if it's against the rules? Clara: Because I love you. 
If a man whistles at you, don't turn around. You are a lady not a dog. 
I will find you. In the farthest corner, I will find you. 
And we all know love is a glass which makes even a monster appear fascinating. 
From the stars, to the stars. 
People who meet in airports are seventy-two percent more likely to fall for each other than people who meet anywhere else. 
I miss you. I miss you. I miss you, I miss you. Be ready, because when I see you, I'll never let you go again. 
I'm telling you this for one reason and one reason only: No matter how sure you are of someone's love, it's always nice to hear it. 
Love makes the world go round? Not at all. Whiskey makes it go round twice as fast. 
Everyone has choices to make; no one has the right to take those choices away from us. Not even out of love.. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
Right now, it's hard to imagine that it is raining anywhere in the world. 
Because love, love is never finished. It circles and circles, the memories out of order and not always complete. 
This is how the girl who couldn't speak and the man who couldn't see fell in love. 
Love fades. Mine has. 
What does the brain matter compared with the heart? 
Just for the record, she still loves you. She wouldn't bother to torture you if she didn't. 
You can love somebody without it being like that. You keep them a stranger, a stranger who's a friend. 
God's definition of what matters is pretty straightforward. He measures our lives by how we love. 
Love is like quicksilver in the hand. Leave the fingers open and it stays. Clutch it and it darts away. 
The purpose of relationship is not to have another who might complete you, but to have another with whom you might share your completeness. 
when you decide you want to be with someone forever, you want forever to start right now. 
There was nowhere I could go that wouldn't be you. 
Love is like a good cake; you never know when it's coming, but you'd better eat it when it does! 
To find out if she really loved me, I hooked her up to a lie detector. And just as I suspected, my machine was broken. 
Loving you forever can't be wrong. Even though you're not here, can't move on 
When I like people immensely I never tell their names to anyone. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. 
The knowledge that she would never be loved in return acted upon her ideas as a tide acts upon cliffs. 
I loved him as we always love for the first time; with idolatry and wild passion. 
The most introspective of souls are often those that have been hurt the most. 
Her existence alone was excuse enough to justify the creation of the entire world. 
I'll come and make love to you at five o'clock. If I'm late start without me. 
You said move on, where do I go? 
Do people always fall in love with things they can't have?' 'Always,' Carol said, smiling, too. 
I saw the world from the stars' point of view, and it looked unbearably lonely. 
I gave you my heart, but it wasn't enough. 
I don't want to live, I want to love first and live incidentally. 
You know someone's right for you when the things they don't to say are even more important than the things they do. 
I realized I’m in love. It's always been right in front of me. 
Love cannot live where there is no trust. 
Thank you for gracing my life with your lovely presence, for adding the sweet measure of your soul to my existence. 
the world is not a pleasant place to be without someone to hold and be held by. 
You can give without loving, but you cannot love without giving. 
Everything want to be loved. Us sing and dance and holler, just trying to be loved. 
Without love we all like birds with broken wings. 
My father gave me the greatest gift anyone could give another person, he believed in me. 
The bottom line is that we never fall for the person we're supposed to. 
Sometimes, remembering hurts too much. 
I’ve been working hard to become the kind of man she needs, the kind of man she already believes me to be. 
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a great triumph over Christianity. 
Does that count as an argument? Can we kiss and make up now? 
By night, Love, tie your heart to mine, and the two together in their sleep will defeat the darkness 
When someone beats a rug, the blows are not against the rug, but against the dust in it. 
All any of us wanted, really, was to know that we counted. That someone else's life would not have been as rich without us here. 
It never gets easier, missing you. And sometimes I wonder if it ever will. 
What we all want, really, is to be loved. That craving drives our worst behavior. 
Love, and you shall be loved. 
If in thirst you drink water from a cup, you see God in it. Those who are not in love with God will see only their own faces in it. 
Love is not something you protect. It’s something you risk. 
I look at you, and I think about you, and I don't know. No one has ever confounded me the way you do. 
Choice or no, my heart is his. 
Love was the most savage monster of all. 
It hurts to love. It's like giving yourself to be flayed and knowing that at any moment the other person may just walk off with your skin. 
The opposite of love is not hate. It is indifference. 
You two go ahead and make out–I'll just sit here and bleed quietly. 
It's easy to cry when you realize that everyone you love will reject you or die. 
I reserve the right to love many different people at once, and to change my prince often. 
Not like this. He wanted it to be real. 
If you listen to the wind very carefully, you'll be able to hear me whisper my love for you. 
The fiercest anger of all, the most incurable, Is that which rages in the place of dearest love. 
A man always finds it hard to realize that he may have finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may have treated her. 
I just don't see why the past has to matter. 
I realized when you look at your mother, you are looking at the purest love you will ever know. 
So many believe that it is love that grows, but it is the knowing that grows and love simply expands to contain it. 
Some people feel love in their hearts, Julie. Some of us feel it all way into our souls. We're the ones who can't forget. 
Love, that moves the sun and the other stars 
I want my world to start and end with you. 
he is both the source of my happiness and the one i want to share it with. 
I want him to love me as much as I love him. 
Faith goes up the stairs that love has built and looks out the windows which hope has opened. 
She knew whose love she doubted. It wasn't her parents' and it wasn't her friends: It was her own. 
I wanted movement and not a calm course of existence. I wanted excitement and danger and the chance to sacrifice myself for my love. 
, . Those mornings when we kiss and surrender for an hour before we say a single word. 
Love is a game of tic-tac-toe, constantly waiting for the next x or o. 
He is the cheese to my macaroni. 
Sometimes you have to learn to love what's good for you. 
Just knowing you exist changed the world for me. 
What are you wishing for?' Grace interrupted. 'To kiss you,' I said to her. 
You have a beautiful laugh. Like the promise of tomorrow. 
Kitten, your hands are heaven and your eyes are my home. 
I’m sort of… coming off a bad relationship” “When did it end?” “Slightly before it started. 
love is blind and lovers cannot see the pretty follies that themselves commit 
You have within you,right now,everything you need to deal with whatever the world can throw at you. 
It is love, not reason, that is stronger than death. 
She writes things with her movements that I for the life of me could never write with a pen. 
She had never imagined she had the power to make someone else so happy. And not a magical power, either--a purely human one. 
Don't be afraid to lose him, because if a man truly loves you, he's not going anywhere 
If you have reasons to love someone, you don’t love them. 
A gentleman holds my hand. A man pulls my hair. A soulmate will do both. 
I’m not a warrior or a goddess,” I said at last. Adrian leaned closer. “As far as I’m concerned, you’re both. 
When what you want is a relationship, and not a person, get a dog. 
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman, that his love has an earlier death. 
I think about you every second of every day and I don’t know how to get over you,” she says. “Don’t,” I beg her. “Please don’t get over me. 
To love someone enough to let them go, you had to let them go forever or you did not love them that much. 
some things are better left in the past. And true things are destined to repeat themselves. 
You can give without loving, but you can never love without giving. 
You'll never be able to let him go. You'll always feel wrong about being with me. 
Ah me, but where are now the songs I sang When life was sweet because you call’d them sweet? 
I am the poet of the poor, because I was poor when I loved; since I could not give gifts, I gave words. 
Love can rebuild the world, they say, so everything's possible when it comes to love. 
To love makes one solitary. 
True love always makes a man better, no matter what woman inspires it. 
There are all kinds of ways for a relationship to be tested, even broken, some, irrevocably; it’s the endings we’re unprepared for. 
After all, a woman who doesn't love cats is never going to be make a man happy. 
Soul connections are not often found and are worth every bit of fight left in you to keep. 
And think not you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
The heart makes its choices without weighing the consequences. It doesn't look ahead to the lonely nights that follow. 
He didn't realize that love as powerful as your mother's for you leaves its own mark. 
—I don't want to lose you —Then why are you the one that keeps letting go? 
You left with my soul in your fists and my heart in your teeth, and I don’t want either of them back.” ~Ben 
What’s wrong is that every morning and every night, I lie in bed wondering why you’re not beside me. 
We all know interspecies romance is weird. 
Everything happens for a reason and, something better will come along for me! 
May I kiss you then? On this miserable paper? I might as well open the window and kiss the night air. 
I shouldn't have to be a liar to make someone love me. I shouldn't be so afraid of losing someone that I'll do anything to make them stay. 
I love you for who you are, not who the world thinks you should be. 
Mine was the twilight and the morning. Mine was a world of rooftops and love songs. 
I know what I have given you I do not know what you have received. 
No human should mislead another by promising them something they know to be untrue. 
He didn't marry you to become king. He became king because he wanted to marry you. 
People fall in love without reason, without even wanting to. You can't predict it. That's love. 
You promised, Seaweed Brain. We would not get separated! Ever again!” “You’re impossible!” “Love you too! 
Three years? That's a thousand tomorrows, ma'am. 
Sometimes I think gravity may be death in disguise. Other times I think gravity is love, which is why love's only demand is that we fall. 
Set the standard! Stop expecting others to show you love, acceptance, commitment, & respect when you don't even show that to yourself. 
Perhaps people like us cannot love. Ordinary people can - that is their secret. 
The supreme happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved; loved for ourselves—say rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
Sometimes I think my whole life has been about holding on to you. 
We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us love. 
The only sea I saw Was the seesaw sea With you riding on it. Lie down, lie easy. Let me shipwreck in your thighs. 
Don’t marry him. Don’t be with him. Be with me. 
I guess the sacrifice of my dignity is the only thing that will save us now. The things I endure for love. The Fates laugh at my torment. 
It's not at all hard to understand a person; it's only hard to listen without bias. 
How far have you walked for men who’ve never held your feet in their laps? 
He went through life with his hands firmly shoved into his pockets. She danced. 
I want your most vital organ. I want it to be mine. 
He didn't mind how he looked to other people, because the nursery magic had made him Real, and when you are Real shabbiness doesn't matter. 
The surest way to hurt yourself is to give up on love, just because it didn’t work out the first time. 
She blushed and so did he. She greeted him in a faltering voice, and he spoke to her without knowing what he was saying. 
What made me run away was doubtless not so much the fear of settling down, but of settling down permanently in something ugly. 
He loved her, he loved her, and until he'd loved her she had never minded being alone . 
Like time suspended, a wound unmended-- you and I. We had no ending, no said goodbye; For all my life, I'll wonder why. 
Never stop smiling not even when you're sad, someone might fall in love with your smile. 
If you love something let it go.. if it comes back its yours 
It is impossible to manufacture or imitate love. 
The practice of love offers no place of safety. We risk loss, hurt, pain. We risk being acted upon by forces outside our control. 
Kids chase the love that eludes them. 
No you sick, stupid creep, I love you. I shouldn't. I shouldn't. You're sick inside, Caine, sick! But I love you. - Diana 
Anatasia You Are My More My Love, My Life Christian 
Just because you love someone, doesn't mean you have to be involved with them. Love is not a bandage to cover wounds. 
Human existence is so fragile a thing and exposed to such dangers that I cannot love without trembling. 
It is better to have an enemy who will fight you in an open field then a lover who will kill you in your sleep. 
There is only one happiness in life, to love and be loved. 
Where is Aelin. Where is my wife? 
Lift your hips for me, love. 
I pray you, do not fall in love with me, for I am falser than vows made in wine. 
For some people, “the point of no return” begins at the very moment their souls become aware of each others’ existence. 
‎I never wanted to have anything in my life that I couldn't stand losing. But it's too late for that. 
I prayed for all his dreams to come true. I prayed that I would always be able to connect with him--even if I was no longer on earth. 
Time is how you spend your love. 
I can hate you more, but I'll never love you less. 
Falling in love was like falling off a cliff. It felt pretty much like flying until you hit the ground. 
Real love finds you once, if you're lucky. 
Falling in love should be the easiest thing in the world, but it's not. 
If love be rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love for pricking and you beat love down. 
Sometimes you know in your heart you love someone, but you have to go away before your head can figure it out. 
What you are to do without me I cannot imagine. 
I loved you long before you loved me. It's the only thing I have you beat at, and I'll bring it up every chance I get. 
Having an eye for beauty isn't the same thing as a weakness except possibly when it comes to you. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love . 
Time expands, then contracts, all in tune with the stirrings of the heart. 
I miss everything about you Can't believe that I still want you And after all the things we've been through 
Love is on every side, and no one's side. Don't ask what Love can do for you. 
In God there is no hunger that needs to be filled, only plenteousness that desires to give. 
One heart cannot serve two masters. 
Because because she came here with me. 
We can live without religion and meditation, but we cannot survive without human affection. 
Love heals scars love left 
The most difficult aspect of moving on is accepting that the other person already did. 
I was feeling insecure you might not love me anymore 
She thought she was independent and strong, but she got one small taste of love and she was hungrier than anyone. She was ravenous. 
He will love only once - but it will be for always. 
Love is a fruit in season at all times and within reach of every hand. 
It took me years to figure out that upset was upset, and tumultuousness was not the same thing as passion. Love isn't drama. 
You must learn to forgive a man when he's in love. He's always a nuisance. 
I'm with you. No matter what else you have in your head I'm with you and I love you. 
Your greatest awakening comes, when you are aware about your infinite nature. 
You see, there are some people that one loves, and others that perhaps one would rather be with. 
If it's ka it'll come like a wind, and your plans will stand before it no more than a barn before a cyclone 
Traveling in the company of those we love is home in motion. 
We're not words, Henry, we're people. Words are how others define us, but we can define ourselves any way we choose. 
It's become impossible to deny he means something to me. 
and the two of them loved each other for a long time in silence without making love again. 
Suddenly it was too hard to be in his presence, too painful to know that he would belong to someone else. 
In this story I am the poet You're the poetry. 
Whoever loves much, performs much, and can accomplish much, and what is done in love is done well. 
I begin to long for some little language such as lovers use, broken words, inarticulate words, like the shuffling of feet on pavement. 
Books are to me as homemade tattoos are to an inmate. Can't get enough of them. 
Tucker strokes my hair. There's something so tender about the gesture. It might as well have been him whispering . 
I love you beyond paint, beyond melodies, beyond words. And I hope you will always feel that, even when I'm not around to tell you so. 
I know your soul. Everything else is just an ornament. 
It’s just so strange. You used to love me, and now you’re a stranger who happens to know all of my secrets. 
Why is it that words like these seem dull and cold? Is it because there is no word tender enough to be your name? 
Nothing of real worth can ever be bought. Love, friendship, honour, valour, respect. All these things have to be earned. 
We have all known the long loneliness and we have learned that the only solution is love and that love comes with community. 
I love you every day. And now I will miss you every day. 
I know and I love you. But I don't think we love each other in the same way. And I think keeping you near me, would destroy me. 
Some girls are full of heartache and poetry and those are the kind of girls who try to save wolves instead of running away from them. 
Love is the only future God offers. 
Darkness may hide the trees and the flowers from the eyes but it cannot hide love from the soul. 
The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr. 
We were very different, and we disagreed about a lot of things, but he was always so interesting, you know? 
A person learns how to love himself through the simple acts of loving and being loved by someone else. 
The worst thing: to give yourself away in exchange for not enough love. 
The Eskimo has fifty-names for snow because it is important to them; there ought to be as many for love. 
it’s a blessed thing to love and feel loved in return. 
I mean, I hope you're happy, But the sky is still the sky without you, And I'm not surprised by that anymore. 
Happiness is the china shop; love is the bull. 
To long a sacrifice can make a stone of a heart 
You don't fall in love with someone because it's convenient. 
If I love you, is that a fact or a weapon? 
For Beatrice, when we first met, I was lonely, and you were pretty. Now I am pretty lonely. 
You'd be surprised what people will do for money that they wouldn't do for love. Myrnin. 
I love you more than songs can say, but I can't keep running after yesterday 
If people did not love one another, I really don't see what use there would be in having any spring. 
The sun's gone dim, and the moon's gone black. For I loved him, and he didn't love back. 
It’s impossible,” he snapped. “Why?” “Because I’m Sebastian, Lord St. Vincent. I can’t be celibate. Everyone knows that. 
no woman can love a weak man hard enough to make him strong. 
i didn't fall in love of course it's never up to you but she was walking back and forth and i was passing through 
Ronan's second secret was Adam Parrish. 
Marriage is not a process for prolonging the life of love, sir. It merely mummifies its corpse. 
Gilbert, I'm afraid I'm scandalously in love with you. 
A heart, once stolen, can never be taken back. 
Do you think we can be friends?” I asked. He stared up at the ceiling. “Probably not, but we can pretend. 
You know, when it works, love is amazing. It's not overrated. 
When you want something this badly, you don't just give up. You fight and fight until you absolutely can't fight anymore. 
Quit being so hard on yourself. We are what we are; we love what we love. We don't need to justify it to anyone not even to ourselves. 
You can't anyone love you. You just have to reveal who you are and take your chances. (105) 
Time has no meaning, Love will endure.. 
I am yours. Don't give myself back to me. 
It’s not so much the journey that’s important; as is the way that we treat those we encounter and those around us, along the way 
Love at first sight is easy to understand; it's when two people have been looking at each other for a lifetime that it becomes a miracle. 
I've never wanted more, until I met you. 
I wanted to see the place where Margaret grew to what she is, even at the worst time of all, when I had no hope of ever calling her mine. 
And I still love you in my own fucked-up way. I miss you, I really do. Can we still be friends? 
One loves truly only once in a lifetime, Julian, even if one isn’t aware of it. 
Love. It was the beginning and end of everything, the foundation and the ceiling and the air in between. 
The quickest path to self-destruction is to push away the people you love. 
A wonderful gift may not be wrapped as you expect. 
and all I could think was that I would like to spend every morning for the rest of my life waking up beside her 
If you claim to be a real friend then be real in your soul. If you claim to be fake then be an enemy instead. 
I would know you anywhere for my true love. Whoever I was and whoever you were, I would know you at once for my true love. 
I wondered if the person who really loves you is the person who knows all your stories, the person who WANTS to know all your stories. 
You'll probably die if you stay with me,' he told me. 'Then I'm dead either way, because I won't survive without you. 
Once you figure out who you are and what you love about yourself, I think it all kind of falls into place. 
To love and be loved is to feel the sun from both sides. 
If someone does not want me it is not the end of the world. But if I do not want me, the world is nothing but endings. 
One is never wounded by the love one gives, only by the love one expects. 
I feel like myself, strong and weak at once - allowed, at least for a little while, to be both. 
Language is the key to the heart of people. 
Real love is to offer your life at the feet of another. 
She wanted to lose herself in him. To tie his arms around her like a tourniquet. If she showed him how much she needed him, he'd run away. 
It's delicious to have people adore you, but it's exhausting, too. Particularly when your own feelings don't match theirs. 
I am the least difficult of men. All I want is boundless love. 
Peace,love,empathy 
LOVE is a friendship set to music 
What will survive of us is love. - from 
Akkarin: I watched the first woman I loved die. I dont think I can survive losing the second. Sonea: I love you too. 
Love is Love no matter old you are, and I knew if I gave you enough time, you'd come back to me. 
Don't touch me; I'll die if you touch me. 
They had an ordinary life, full of ordinary things-if love can ever be called that. 
Your inner strength is your outer foundation 
I am lonely, yet not everybody will do. I don’t know why, some people fill the gaps and others emphasize my loneliness. 
Why is it so hard to articulate love yet so easy to express disappointment? 
In the darkness, he is invisible, but I can still feel him beside me. Sometimes you don't have to see something to know it is there. 
To love another human in all of her splendor and imperfect perfection , it is a magnificent task tremendous and foolish and human. 
Not sure how I felt about Antonio and Echo, I linked my fingers with hers. Antonio cocked a surprised eyebrow. 
Love, too, has to be learned. 
if they put an iron circle around your neck I will bite it away 
The main facts in human life are five: birth, food, sleep, love and death. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
When I walk, I walk with you. Where I go, you're with me always. 
It's true that nothing in this world makes us so necessary to others as the affection we have for them. 
There is peace even in the storm 
I had fallen too far. I was in love with Rush Finlay. 
That I shall love always, I argue thee that love is life, and life hath immortality 
Love is the most selfish of all the passions. 
People don't need love. What they need is success in one form or another. It can be love but it needn't be. 
You're better than seven years of food. You're better than windows. You're even better than the sky. 
I love you, Missy girl. Even if I can't be with you, know that I'm here. So, that's it. More than the stars, Taylor. More than the stars. 
There will be no more British guys. Unless they are members of the royal family, of course. 
A broken heart is just the growing pains necessary so that you can love more completely when the real thing comes along. 
Love me sweet With all thou art Feeling, thinking, seeing; Love me in the Lightest part, Love me in full Being. 
It may be that you are settled in another place it may be that you are happy but the one who took your heart wields final power. 
Deep in my heart I'm concealing things that I'm longing to say. Scared to confess what I'm feeling - frightened you'll slip away. 
Him that I love, I wish to be free -- even from me. 
Hide yourself in God, so when a man wants to find you he will have to go there first. 
Love is forever. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be love. The world is beautiful. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be the world. 
Like your the ocean and he's desperate to drown. 
There are not enough days in forever to allow me to fully express the depth of my love for you. 
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest. 
Any time not spent on love is wasted. 
Wine enters through the mouth, Love, the eyes. I raise the glass to my mouth, I look at you, I sigh. 
To become vegetarian is to step into the stream which leads to nirvana. 
It is a bad thing to have love and nowhere to put it. 
A couple of times in your life, it happens like that. You meet a stranger, and all you know is that you need to know everything about him. 
So shut up, live, travel, adventure, bless and don't be sorry 
Faith is why I'm here today and faith is why I made it through. 
Were knowledge all, what were our need To thrill and faint and sweetly bleed? 
Yesterday we obeyed kings and bent our necks before emperors. But today we kneel only to truth, follow only beauty, and obey only love. 
How beautiful would it be if we could just see souls instead of bodies? To see love and compassion instead of curves. 
Loving you was like going to war; I never came back the same. 
I wonder how much of the day I spend just callin' after you. 
I love you. It hurts more than anything ever has, but I do. So don't you dare tell me I don't. Don't you ever say it again! 
Desire is the kind of thing that eats you and leaves you starving. 
Accidents ambush the unsuspecting, often violently, just like love. 
It was the first time I was ever in love, and I learned a lot. Before that I'd never even thought about killing myself. 
I am a restlessness inside a stillness inside a restlessness. 
Love cures people, both the ones who give it and the ones who receive it. 
You and I, it's as though we have been taught to kiss in heaven and sent down to earth together, to see if we know what we were taught. 
I love you now for what we've already shared, and I love you now in anticipation of all that's to come. 
to love means to realize there is a time to let the beloved one go 
All children should be taught to unconditionally accept, approve, admire, appreciate, forgive, trust, and ultimately, love their own person. 
She wanted to cause him pain for taking a place in her heart she wouldn't have given him if she'd known the truth. 
I had forgotten how much light there is in the world, till you gave it back to me. 
A man is only as good as what he loves. 
There's two kinds of women--those you write poems about and those you don't. 
Blessed is the influence of one true, loving human soul on another. 
You're still alive. And that means you'll love and be loved and in the end, nothing else really matters. 
Why did dusk and fir-scent and the afterglow of autumnal sunsets make people say absurd things? 
Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? 
Nothing revives the past so completely as a smell that was once associated with it. 
Vane grabbed me. “DuLac, let’s chat.” British-speak for “Stand still while I yell at you. 
So I learned two things that night, and the next day, from him: the perfection of a moment, and the fleeting nature of it. 
Little did I realise how much I would miss those ten minutes, those ten minutes in which I lived an entire lifetime. 
I have made a lot of mistakes falling in love, and regretted most of them, but never the potatoes that went with them. 
You can’t fool people into loving you. 
Why be alone when we can be together baby You can make my life worthwhile And I can make you start to smile 
Though sorrow may impede my heart, It is of great love to have known you. 
I profess not to know how women's hearts are wooed and won. To me they have always been matters of riddle and admiration. 
The Artist always has the masters in his eyes. 
You have to live each hour as if it's your last and each day as if you were immortal. - Kate Sheffield 
A perfect person is easy to love. But when somebody likes all your imperfections, well, that's when you know they really mean it. 
The strength of a man isn't seen in the power of his arms. It's seen in the love with which he EMBRACES you. 
But she needs me more than she needs him and I guess being needed is almost as good as being loved. Maybe better. 
Life is slippery. We all need a loving hand to hold onto. 
Oh to have you with me, to have you here, not to be alone, but to be with you, my beauty, you of all souls! You. 
Love needs room to grow. Like a rose. Or a tumor. 
In love there are two things - bodies and words. 
Yours (now I'm even losing my name - it was getting shorter and shorter all the time and is now: Yours) 
I wonder if it's medically possible to be addicted to another human being. 
We outgrow love like other things and put it in a drawer, till it an antique fashion shows like costumes grandsires wore. 
I'd shut the whole world down just to tell you 
Of all the bright cruel lies they tell you, the cruelest is the one called love. 
Love of love written by the broken hearted, love of life written by the dead. 
For awhile, I thought that was love. -Gaara 
She knew with painful certainty that the opposite of love was not hate, but indifference. 
Some things are private. Some things needed to be said, even when the person who needed to hear them couldn’t hear anything. Ever again. 
If you don't love me, it does not matter, anyway I can love for both of us 
I fell in love with his unchanging soul. 
This last night we tear into each other, as if to wound, as if to find the key to everything before morning. 
Falling in love is painful on the knees. 
I know I'm not going to be in your head all the time. But once you know me, I'll be forever in your heart. 
You know you're in love when you can't fall asleep because reality is finally better than your dreams. 
A friend is someone who knows all about you and still loves you. 
Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that. 
We accept the love we think we deserve. 
As he read, I fell in love the way you fall asleep: slowly, and then all at once. 
It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are not. 
It is not a lack of love, but a lack of friendship that makes unhappy marriages. 
Love all, trust a few, do wrong to none. 
Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage. 
There is never a time or place for true love. It happens accidentally, in a heartbeat, in a single flashing, throbbing moment. 
Love is that condition in which the happiness of another person is essential to your own. 
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind, And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. 
Love is like the wind, you can't see it but you can feel it. 
If you can make a woman laugh, you can make her do anything. 
You don't love someone because they're perfect, you love them in spite of the fact that they're not. 
There is nothing I would not do for those who are really my friends. I have no notion of loving people by halves, it is not my nature. 
The real lover is the man who can thrill you by kissing your forehead or smiling into your eyes or just staring into space. 
If I had a flower for every time I thought of you I could walk through my garden forever. 
To die will be an awfully big adventure. 
When someone loves you, the way they talk about you is different. You feel safe and comfortable. 
A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony in a moment. 
Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
Just when you think it can't get any worse, it can. And just when you think it can't get any better, it can. 
I love you as certain dark things are to be loved, in secret, between the shadow and the soul. 
The one you love and the one who loves you are never, ever the same person. 
Love is needing someone. Love is putting up with someone's bad qualities because they somehow complete you. 
One is loved because one is loved. No reason is needed for loving. 
We love the things we love for what they are. 
I would die for you. But I won't live for you. 
You are, and always have been, my dream. 
The only thing worse than a boy who hates you: a boy that loves you. 
So, I love you because the entire universe conspired to help me find you. 
Never love anyone who treats you like you're ordinary. 
Where there is love there is life. 
Nobody has ever measured, not even poets, how much the heart can hold. 
I would always rather be happy than dignified. 
Once upon a time there was a boy who loved a girl, and her laughter was a question he wanted to spend his whole life answering. 
This is a good sign, having a broken heart. It means we have tried for something. 
We loved with a love that was more than love. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love. 
He's more myself than I am. Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same. 
The more I know of the world, the more I am convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require so much! 
They say a person needs just three things to be truly happy in this world: someone to love, something to do, and something to hope for. 
I have decided to stick to love Hate is too great a burden to bear. 
Two people in love, alone, isolated from the world, that's beautiful. 
The heart was made to be broken. 
What's meant to be will always find a way 
For the two of us, home isn't a place. It is a person. And we are finally home. 
Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. 
There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness. 
The very essence of romance is uncertainty. 
Man may have discovered fire, but women discovered how to play with it. 
And, in the end The love you take is equal to the love you make. 
Love does not consist of gazing at each other, but in looking outward together in the same direction. 
Love is a fire. But whether it is going to warm your hearth or burn down your house, you can never tell. 
If you remember me, then I don't care if everyone else forgets. 
Love doesn't just sit there, like a stone, it has to be made, like bread; remade all the time, made new. 
It was love at first sight, at last sight, at ever and ever sight. 
And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love. 
If you love somebody, let them go, for if they return, they were always yours. If they don't, they never were. 
Be careful of love. It'll twist your brain around and leave you thinking up is down and right is wrong. 
If you like her, if she makes you happy, and if you feel like you know her---then don't let her go. 
When love is not madness it is not love. 
I love you more than there are stars in the sky and fish in the sea. 
Love does not begin and end the way we seem to think it does. Love is a battle, love is a war; love is a growing up. 
Do you think I'm pretty? I think you're beautiful Beautiful? You are so beautiful, it hurts sometimes. 
Declarations of love amuse me. Especially when unrequited. 
I love you. Remember. They cannot take it 
A woman's heart should be so hidden in God that a man has to seek Him just to find her. 
True love is rare, and it's the only thing that gives life real meaning. 
Love is an irresistible desire to be irresistibly desired. 
I was smiling yesterday,I am smiling today and I will smile tomorrow.Simply because life is too short to cry for anything. 
If I can stop one heart from breaking, I shall not live in vain. 
I think if it is true that there are as many minds as there are heads, then there are as many kinds of love as there are hearts. 
It is a curious thought, but it is only when you see people looking ridiculous that you realize just how much you love them. 
When the power of love overcomes the love of power, the world will know peace. 
The greater the love, the greater the tragedy when it's over. 
I loved her against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that could be. 
Hate the sin, love the sinner. 
Of all forms of caution, caution in love is perhaps the most fatal to true happiness. 
One love, one heart, one destiny. 
All I ever wanted was to reach out and touch another human being not just with my hands but with my heart. 
You know, when it works, love is pretty amazing. It's not overrated. There's a reason for all those songs. 
The most painful thing is losing yourself in the process of loving someone too much, and forgetting that you are special too. 
Gravitation is not responsible for people falling in love. 
We waste time looking for the perfect lover, instead of creating the perfect love. 
Never close your lips to those whom you have already opened your heart. 
Any fool can be happy. It takes a man with real heart to make beauty out of the stuff that makes us weep. 
Find what you love and let it kill you. 
Love is not affectionate feeling, but a steady wish for the loved person's ultimate good as far as it can be obtained. 
One cannot think well, love well, sleep well, if one has not dined well. 
The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but also to hate his friends. 
Things we lose have a way of coming back to us in the end, if not always in the way we expect. 
I want To do with you what spring does with the cherry trees. 
Look after my heart - I've left it with you. 
Have enough courage to trust love one more time and always one more time. 
He does something to me, that boy. Every time. It’s his only detriment. He steps on my heart. He makes me cry. 
I would like to be the air that inhabits you for a moment only. I would like to be that unnoticed and that necessary. 
You can't measure the mutual affection of two human beings by the number of words they exchange. 
Tonight I can write the saddest lines I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 
Sometimes it's a form of love just to talk to somebody that you have nothing in common with and still be fascinated by their presence. 
Happiness [is] only real when shared 
As if you were on fire from within. The moon lives in the lining of your skin. 
A DEFINITION NOT FOUND IN THE DICTIONARY Not leaving: an act of trust and love, often deciphered by children 
One day you will kiss a man you can't breathe without, and find that breath is of little consequence. 
Promise me you'll never forget me because if I thought you would, I'd never leave. 
I wasn't actually in love, but I felt a sort of tender curiosity. 
Then I realize what it is. It's him. Something about him makes me feel like I am about to fall. Or turn to liquid. Or burst into flames. 
Art and love are the same thing: It’s the process of seeing yourself in things that are not you. 
It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important. 
I loved you like a man loves a woman he never touches, only writes to, keeps little photographs of. 
Tears shed for another person are not a sign of weakness. They are a sign of a pure heart. 
You yourself, as much as anybody in the entire universe, deserve your love and affection 
A half-read book is a half-finished love affair. 
There is only one page left to write on. I will fill it with words of only one syllable. I love. I have loved. I will love. 
Someone I loved once gave me a box full of darkness. It took me years to understand that this too, was a gift. 
Happiness is holding someone in your arms and knowing you hold the whole world. 
I'm on Aslan's side even if there isn't any Aslan to lead it. I'm going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn't any Narnia. 
I'm oxygen and he's dying to breathe. 
Who, being loved, is poor? 
To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance. 
I like flaws. I think they make things interesting. 
A purpose of human life, no matter who is controlling it, is to love whoever is around to be loved. 
It is easy to love people in memory; the hard thing is to love them when they are there in front of you. 
Love can change a person the way a parent can change a baby- awkwardly, and often with a great deal of mess. 
You know how they say you only hurt the ones you love? Well, it works both ways. 
When I saw you I fell in love, and you smiled because you knew. 
Friendship marks a life even more deeply than love. Love risks degenerating into obsession, friendship is never anything but sharing. 
I fell in love with her when we were together, then fell deeper in love with her in the years we were apart. 
Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. 
What she had realized was that love was that moment when your heart was about to burst. 
One word Frees us of all the weight and pain of life: That word is love. 
Sorrow is how we learn to love. Your heart isn't breaking. It hurts because it's getting larger. The larger it gets, the more love it holds. 
The love of learning, the sequestered nooks, And all the sweet serenity of books 
The more one judges, the less one loves. 
I guess that’s just part of loving people: You have to give things up. Sometimes you even have to give them up. 
The heart has its reasons which reason knows not. 
The emotion that can break your heart is sometimes the very one that heals it 
Come sleep with me: We won't make Love, Love will make us. 
Holding Eleanor's hand was like holding a butterfly. Or a heartbeat. Like holding something complete, and completely alive. 
Trust your heart if the seas catch fire, live by love though the stars walk backward. 
Ever has it been that love knows not its own depth until the hour of separation. 
Sometimes love means letting go when you want to hold on tighter. 
When someone is in your heart, they're never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
Don't cry over someone who wouldn't cry over you. 
I wonder how many people don't get the one they want, but end up with the one they're supposed to be with. 
Absence diminishes small loves and increases great ones, as the wind blows out the candle and fans the bonfire. 
Let go of me! 
Being with you never felt wrong. It's the one thing I did right. You're the one thing I did right. 
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways. I love thee to the depth and breadth and height My soul can reach 
To be fully seen by somebody, then, and be loved anyhow - this is a human offering that can border on miraculous. 
When you trip over love, it is easy to get up. But when you fall in love, it is impossible to stand again. 
This is where it all begins. Everything starts here, today. 
I want to be in a relationship where you telling me you love me is just a ceremonious validation of what you already show me. 
True love is usually the most inconvenient kind. 
Nothing takes the taste out of peanut butter quite like unrequited love. 
To lose balance sometimes for love is part of living a balanced life. 
The sunlight claps the earth, and the moonbeams kiss the sea: what are all these kissings worth, if thou kiss not me? 
The things we love destroy us every time, lad. Remember that. 
Throw your dreams into space like a kite, and you do not know what it will bring back, a new life, a new friend, a new love, a new country. 
My wish is that you may be loved to the point of madness. 
If you love something set it free, but don't be surprised if it comes back with herpes. 
The course of true love never did run smooth. 
If we have no peace, it is because we have forgotten that we belong to each other. 
I won't ever leave you, even though you're always leaving me. 
sometimes you don't need a goal in life, you don't need to know the big picture. you just need to know what you're going to do next! 
I love you as certain dark things are loved, secretly, between the shadow and the soul. 
The world was collapsing, and the only thing that really mattered to me was that she was alive. 
Romance is the glamour which turns the dust of everyday life into a golden haze. 
We are who we are, be­cause of those we choose to love and be­cause of those who love us. 
You have to kiss a lot of frogs before you find your prince 
When I look in the mirror, I know I’m looking at someone who isn’t sure she deserves to be loved at all. 
For my part, I prefer my heart to be broken. It is so lovely, dawn-kaleidoscopic within the crack. 
I bet you could sometimes find all the mysteries of the universe in someone's hand. 
For where all love is, the speaking is unnecessary 
The human heart is a strange vessel. Love and hatred can exist side by side. 
Spending time with you showed me what I’ve been missing in my life. 
If he loved with all the powers of his puny being, he couldn't love as much in eighty years as I could in a day. 
It is possible to be in love with you just because of who you are. 
The music in his laughter had a way of rounding off the missing notes in her soul. 
More smiling, less worrying. More compassion, less judgment. More blessed, less stressed. More love, less hate. 
If only she could be so oblivious again, to feel such love without knowing it, mistaking it for laughter. 
Each of us is born with a box of matches inside us but we can't strike them all by ourselves 
love, I've come to understand is more than three words mumbled before bedtime. 
The highest function of love is that it makes the loved one a unique and irreplaceable being. 
It's not how much we give but how much love we put into giving. 
Love is how you stay alive, even after you are gone. 
Don't waste your love on somebody, who doesn't value it. 
The soul is healed by being with children. 
I know enough to know that no woman should ever marry a man who hated his mother. 
And next time you're planning to injure yourself to get me attention, just remember that a little sweet talk works wonders. 
I'd learned that some things are best kept secret. 
True love is not so much a matter of romance as it is a matter of anxious concern for the well-being of one's companion. 
I have feelings too. I am still human. All I want is to be loved, for myself and for my talent. 
Sometimes God allows what he hates to accomplish what he loves. 
Just because you're beautiful and perfect, it's made you conceited. 
Let yourself be drawn by the stronger pull of that which you truly love. 
That's what people do who love you. They put their arms around you and love you when you're not so lovable. 
It's hard being left behind. ( ) It's hard to be the one who stays. 
You are the one girl that made me risk eveything for a future worth having. 
Yours is the light by which my spirit's born: - you are my sun, my moon, and all my stars. 
Love is not the absence of logic but logic examined and recalculated heated and curved to fit inside the contours of the heart 
Love has nothing to do with what you are expecting to get - only with what you are expecting to give - which is everything 
Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow, That I shall say good night till it be morrow. 
When it's gone, you'll know what a gift love was. You'll suffer like this. So go back and fight to keep it. 
Romance is thinking about your significant other, when you are supposed to be thinking about something else. 
True love comes quietly, without banners or flashing lights. If you hear bells, get your ears checked. 
The heart is the toughest part of the body. Tenderness is in the hands. 
Moments, when lost, can't be found again. They're just gone. 
Why are old lovers able to become friends? Two reasons. They never truly loved each other, or they love each other still. 
I belong to my beloved, and my beloved is mine. 
Love is the extremely difficult realization that something other than oneself is real. 
Someday you'll find someone special again. People who've been in love once usually do. It's in their nature. 
Love, n. A temporary insanity curable by marriage. 
I wonder if fears ever really go away, or if they just lose their power over us. 
Love, it never dies. It never goes away, it never fades, so long as you hang on to it. Love can make you immortal 
There is always something left to love. 
Trust no friend without faults, and love a woman, but no angel. 
We must love one another or die 
If a thing loves, it is infinite. 
Despite your best efforts, people are going to be hurt when it's time for them to be hurt. 
There is nothing more truly artistic than to love people. 
No woman wants to be in submission to a man who isn't in submission to God! 
Be the reason someone smiles. Be the reason someone feels loved and believes in the goodness in people. 
It doesn't matter who you are or what you look like, so long as somebody loves you. 
Love is a better master than duty. 
The greatest happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved -- loved for ourselves, or rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
No matter how much you think you love somebody, you'll step back when the pool of their blood edges up too close. 
So it’s true, when all is said and done, grief is the price we pay for love. 
What greater gift than the love of a cat. 
He is beauty, inside and out. He is the silver lining in a world of darkness. He is my light. 
There's a difference between really loving someone and loving the idea of her. 
Goodbyes are only for those who love with their eyes. Because for those who love with heart and soul there is no such thing as separation. 
We are all worthy of one another. 
The fate of your heart is your choice and no one else gets a vote 
Love cannot be reduced to a catalogue of reasons why, and a catalogue of reasons cannot be put together into love. 
Lovers alone wear sunlight. 
Oh no. Don't smile. You'll kill me. I stop breathing when you smile. 
Do I love you? My God, if your love were a grain of sand, mine would be a universe of beaches. 
My great hope is to laugh as much as I cry; to get my work done and try to love somebody and have the courage to accept the love in return. 
The great tragedy of life is not that men perish, but that they cease to love. 
I think it is all a matter of love; the more you love a memory the stronger and stranger it becomes 
Nothing ever happens like you imagine it will 
The scariest thing about distance is that you don’t know whether they’ll miss you or forget you. 
With him, life was routine; without him, life was unbearable. 
The day the power of love overrules the love of power, the world will know peace. 
I think we ought to live happily ever after. 
I don’t know what they are called, the spaces between seconds– but I think of you always in those intervals. 
Love is a rebellious bird, that nobody can tame, and you call him quite in vain, if it suits him not to come. 
Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as my own: in pain and sickness it would still be dear. 
The only thing more unthinkable than leaving was staying; the only thing more impossible than staying was leaving. 
Anyone who loves in the expectation of being loved in return is wasting their time. 
When you love someone, you say their name different. Like it's safe inside your mouth. 
You're like a song that I heard when I was a little kid but forgot I knew until I heard it again. 
Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them, humanity cannot survive. 
Wherever you will go, I will let you down, But this lullaby goes on. 
It’s dark now and I am very tired. I love you, always. Time is nothing. 
I have never found anybody who could stand to accept the daily demonstrative love I feel in me, and give back as good as I give. 
I'm not sure this is a world I belong in anymore. I'm not sure that I want to wake up. 
Heaven would never be heaven without you. 
I know my heart will never be the same But I'm telling myself I'll be okay 
I'm saying I'm in love with you! I've been in love with you this whole bleeding year! 
The moment you stop to think about whether you love someone, you've already stopped loving that person forever. 
I may not always be with you But when we're far apart Remember you will be with me Right inside my heart 
[H]iding how you really feel and trying to make everyone happy doesn't make you nice, it just makes you a liar. 
The best things in life make you sweaty. 
Do what you love, love what you do, and with all your heart give yourself to it. 
My mother she is beautiful, softened at the edges and tempered with a spine of steel. I want to grow old and be like her. 
Love recognizes no barriers. It jumps hurdles, leaps fences, penetrates walls to arrive at its destination full of hope. 
Parents were the only ones obligated to love you; from the rest of the world you had to earn it. 
To fear love is to fear life, and those who fear life are already 3-parts dead. 
There ain't no way you can hold onto something that wants to go, you understand? You can only love what you got while you got it. 
Morning without you is a dwindled dawn. 
Whenever you are confronted with an opponent. Conquer him with love. 
Some people feel like they don't deserve love. They walk away quietly into empty spaces, trying to close the gaps of the past. 
When in a relationship, a real man doesn't make his woman jealous of others, he makes others jealous of his woman. 
Those sweet lips. My, oh my, I could kiss those lips all night long. Good things come to those who wait. 
The Bible tells us to love our neighbors, and also to love our enemies; probably because generally they are the same people. 
You are my life now. 
It's the imperfections that make things beautiful 
The strongest love is the love that can demonstrate its fragility. 
Remember that the best relationship is one in which your love for each other exceeds your need for each other. 
Accept the things to which fate binds you, and love the people with whom fate brings you together,but do so with all your heart. 
When you have seen as much of life as I have, you will not underestimate the power of obsessive love. 
One day spent with someone you love can change everything. 
There is no love sincerer than the love of food. 
Love is like a brick. You can build a house, or you can sink a dead body. 
I will not try to convince you to love me, to respect me, to commit to me. I deserve better than that; I AM BETTER THAN THAT Goodbye. 
The great thing to remember is that though our feelings come and go God's love for us does not. 
She wasn't doing a thing that I could see, except standing there leaning on the balcony railing, holding the universe together. 
If you love a flower that lives on a star, it is sweet to look at the sky at night. All the stars are a-bloom with flowers 
Keep your best wishes, close to your heart and watch what happens 
If you ever looked at me once with what I know is in you, I would be your slave. 
Her heart was a secret garden and the walls were very high. 
I don't care what you say to me. I care what you share with me. 
I know you're tired but come, this is the way. 
I envy people that know love. That have someone who takes them as they are. 
The voice of Love seemed to call to me, but it was a wrong number. 
Love, the poet said, is woman's whole existence. 
If I love you, what business is it of yours? 
When you love someone you let them take care of you. 
He's not your prince charming if he doesn't make sure you know that you're his princess. 
nothing in this world was more difficult than love. 
Friends are the family you choose (~ Nin/Ithilnin, Elven rogue). 
Being with you and not being with you is the only way I have to measure time. 
I love you more than I think I should. 
All my heart is yours, sir: it belongs to you; and with you it would remain, were fate to exile the rest of me from your presence forever. 
She is a friend of my mind. She gather me, man. The pieces I am, she gather them and give them back to me in all the right order. 
Don't leave a piece of jewelry at his house so you can go back and get it later; he may be with his real girlfriend. 
I've always loved you, and when you love someone, you love the whole person, just as he or she is, and not as you would like them to be. 
There is love in holding and there is love in letting go. 
Why is love intensified by absence? 
A thousand half-loves must be forsaken to take one whole heart home. 
The future for me is already a thing of the past - You were my first love and you will be my last 
Love makes you want to be a better man—right, right. But maybe love, real love, also gives you permission to just be the man you are. 
They do not love that do not show their love. 
How far should a person go in the name of true love? 
The love that moves the sun and the other stars. 
One ought to hold on to one's heart; for if one lets it go, one soon loses control of the head too. 
I'm gonna fight for you, until your heart stops beating. 
If I know what love is, it is because of you. 
Ah, what happiness it is to be with people who are all happy, to press hands, press cheeks, smile into eyes. 
Though lovers be lost, love shall not; And death shall have no dominion. 
I want to try making things right because picking up the pieces is way better than leaving them the way they are. 
If I could but know his heart, everything would become easy. 
And all I loved, I loved alone. 
If I were a tree, I would have no reason to love a human. 
I'm a little pencil in the hand of a writing God, who is sending a love letter to the world. 
Moving on is easy. It's staying moved on that's trickier. 
But if I hadn't fallen, I wouldn't have met you. 
The power of finding beauty in the humblest things makes home happy and life lovely. 
Loving someone and having them love you back is the most precious thing in the world. 
Let me die the moment my love dies. Let me not outlive my own capacity to love. Let me die still loving, and so, never die. 
Love is a serious mental disease. 
Did I really want to stay on this road longer, knowing it was only going to end in devastation? 
Forever and ever, kid, until you're sick and tired of seeing me. 
If you don't receive love from the ones who are meant to love you, you will never stop looking for it. 
To love someone means to see them as God intended them. 
Don’t sacrifice yourself too much, because if you sacrifice too much there’s nothing else you can give and nobody will care for you. 
Where there is great love, there are always miracles. 
to love is to destroy, and that to be loved is to be the one destroyed. 
There are memories that time does not erase Forever does not make loss forgettable, only bearable. 
Love is our true destiny. We do not find the meaning of life by ourselves alone - we find it with another. 
I miss him in so many ways, but right now I miss him in the way you always miss someone when you're single among a room full of couples. 
A fit, healthy body—that is the best fashion statement 
The story of life is quicker than the wink of an eye, the story of love is hello and goodbye until we meet again 
Then love knew it was called love. And when I lifted my eyes to your name, suddenly your heart showed me my way 
One of the things that makes me who I am is the loyalty I have to people I hold close to my heart. 
Christian, you are the state lottery, the cure for cancer, and the three wishes from Aladdin's lamp all rolled into one 
When you forgive, you love. And when you love, God’s light shines upon you. 
I wish you could be kissed, Jane,' he said. 'Because I would beg just one off you. Under all this.' He flailed an arm toward the stars. 
Love is the strangest, most illogical thing in the world. 
Sometimes it takes a heartbreak to shake us awake & help us see we are worth so much more than we're settling for. 
They're in love. Fuck the war. 
True love is the best thing in the world, except for cough drops. 
Woman is sacred; the woman one loves is holy. 
I have seen the best of you, and the worst of you, and I choose both. 
You’re just another story I can’t tell anymore. 
You’ll never be able to find yourself if you’re lost in someone else. 
Actually that’s my secret — I can’t even talk about you to anybody because I don’t want any more people to know how wonderful you are. 
People should fall in love with their eyes closed. 
Do not swear by the moon, for she changes constantly. then your love would also change. 
How far would you go to keep the hope of love alive? 
My heart only ever had one thought, one want. One need. Despite all, in spite of all All my heart has ever wanted is you. 
Love is scary: it changes; it can go away. That's the part of the risk. I don't want to be scared anymore. 
Choose your love. Love your choice. 
The only creatures that are evolved enough to convey pure love are dogs and infants. 
And I wondered if love was too weak a word for what he felt, what he’d done for me. For what I felt for him. 
As lovers, the difference between men and women is that women can love all day long, but men only at times. 
It's the kind of kiss that inspires stars to climb into the sky and light up the world. 
Until one has loved an animal, a part of one's soul remains unawakened. 
Then I discovered that being related is no guarantee of love! 
There is nothing that is going to make people hate you more, and love you more, than telling the truth. 
There could have been no two hearts so open, no tastes so similar, no feelings so in unison 
some moments are nice, some are nicer, some are even worth writing about. 
If you truly want to be respected by people you love, you must prove to them that you can survive without them. 
he came to think, It surprised him that strangers didn't stop each other on the street to say 
The only love that I really believe in is a mother’s love for her children. 
My soul sees its equal in you. 
I felt like an animal, and animals don’t know sin, do they? 
Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this. 
You don’t take away my choices. You are my choice. 
Of all our games, love's play is the only one which threatens to unsettle the soul 
I find the best way to love someone is not to change them, but instead, help them reveal the greatest version of themselves. 
This is what happened in love. One of you cried a lot and then both of you grew sarcastic. 
I wish you to know that you have been the last dream of my soul. 
True love begins when nothing is looked for in return. 
you're an expert at sorry and keeping the lines blurry 
I will follow you to the ends of the world. 
I can't set my hopes too high, 'Cause every hello ends with a goodbye. 
If you love something so much let it go. If it comes back it was meant to be; if it doesn't it never was 
A kiss is a lovely trick designed by nature to stop speech when words become superfluous. 
When you love someone, its never over. You move on, because you have to but you take them with you in your heart 
I don't want to hurt you or anybody so please forget about me. Just try. Find yourself a better friend. 
I am certain of nothing but the holiness of the Heart's affections and the truth of the Imagination. 
Limitless undying love which shines around me like a million suns it calls me on and on across the universe. 
Every woman wants a man who'll fall in love with her soul as well as her body. 
I love her, and that's the beginning and end of everything. 
I love you,’ he whispered, and kissed my brow. ‘Thorns and all. 
What about when someone doesn't need a shoulder? What if they need the arms? 
If I have learned anything in this long life of mine, it is this: in love we find out who we want to be; in war we find out who we are. 
The saddest thing about love, Joe, is that not only the love cannot last forever, but even the heartbreak is soon forgotten. 
And yet,to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. 
With you, intimacy colours my voice. even ‘hello’ sounds like ‘come here'. 
Dare to love yourself as if you were a rainbow with gold at both ends. 
Wait. You think I'm going to die? That's why you slept with me? 
To fall in love with God is the greatest romance; to seek him the greatest adventure; to find him, the greatest human achievement. 
I love you enough to never make you choose. 
He loved her, of course, but better than that, he chose her, day after day. Choice: that was the thing. 
So don't you worry your pretty little mind because people throw rocks at things that shine. [Ours] 
For it was not into my ear you whispered, but into my heart. It was not my lips you kissed, but my soul. 
When is a monster not a monster? Oh, when you love it. 
You may choose to look the other way but you can never say again that you did not know. 
Love meant jumping off a cliff and trusting that a certain person would be there to catch you at the bottom. 
Amor Fati – “Love Your Fate”, which is in fact your life. 
Would you destroy Something perfect in order to make it beautiful? 
Of course he loves me. I’m his sister.” “Blood isn’t love,” said Magnus, and his voice was bitter. 
Sometimes we love with nothing more than hope. Sometimes we cry with everything except tears. 
Love one another, but make not a bond of love: Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls. 
When you love someone, you don't have a choice. Love takes your choices away. - Clary Fray 
When he died, all things soft and beautiful and bright would be buried with him. 
Adam smiled cheerily. Ronan would start wars and burn cities for that true smile, elastic and amiable. 
We’d met at a carefree time, a moment full of promise, in its place now were the harsh lessons of the real world. 
You were you, and I was I; we were two before our time. I was yours before I knew, and you have always been mine too. 
Missing someone, they say, is self-centered. I self-center you more than ever. 
The way you walk, way you talk, way you say my name; it's beautiful, wonderful, don't you ever change. 
Until this moment, I had not realized that someone could break your heart twice, along the very same fault lines. 
If you could only love enough, you could be the most powerful person in the world. 
To the world you may be one person but to one person you may be the world. 
Don't ever think I fell for you, or fell over you. I didn't fall in love, I rose in it. 
I drive around the streets an inch away from weeping, ashamed of my sentimentality and possible love. 
When people fall in love, they burst into flames. 
Even on my weakest days I get a little bit stronger 
I don't care if you danced naked on the roof of the Little Palace with him. I love you, Alina, even the part of you that loved him. 
One should always be in love. That's the reason one should never marry. 
I didn't want to kiss you goodbye — that was the trouble — I wanted to kiss you good night — and there's a lot of difference. 
Neither love nor evil conquers all, but evil cheats more. 
How could I have ever been ashamed of loving Dante Quintana? 
Did you think you could stop me? I'll burn the world down to save her. 
A heart filled with anger has no room for love. 
There was beauty in the idea of freedom, but it was an illusion. Every human heart was chained by love. 
So I placed my heart under lock and key To take some time, and take care of me But I turn around and you're standing here 
Love is not a maybe thing, you know when you love someone. 
…There is the heat of Love, the pulsing rush of Longing, the lover’s whisper, irresistible—magic to make the sanest man go mad. 
Love wins, love always wins. 
I am no longer in love with her, that's certain, but maybe I love her. Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 
Would he find her? Without question. Would he save her? Always. 
When you love you wish to do things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve. 
A man can be happy with any woman as long as he does not love her. 
If two people love each other there can be no happy end to it. 
Each time you happen to me all over again. 
Failed relationships can be described as so much wasted make-up. 
And I can fight only for something that I love, love only what I respect, and respect only what I at least know. 
You cannot be with someone just because you don’t want to hurt him. You have your own happiness to think about. 
I don't like it when I outweigh my men. 
I'll find you. There is no place in this world you can hide from me. I'm watching. Love, Dimitri 
Last time I saw you, I said that it hurt too much to love you. But I was wrong about that. The truth is it hurts too much not to love you. 
The fact is…I’m in love with you, and I have been for some time. 
To love is to recognize yourself in another. 
Most of us must learn to love people and use things rather than loving things and using people. 
Yes it wasn't over, it still isn't over. 
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow, than a man swear he loves me. 
You can live your whole life not realizing that what you're looking for is right in front of you. 
Oh, love isn't there to make us happy. I believe it exists to show us how much we can endure. 
A busy, vibrant, goal-oriented woman is so much more attractive than a woman who waits around for a man to validate her existence. 
You had to know a person well to make them laugh like that. 
And you can't love, not fully, unless you are loved in return. 
The truest form of love is how you behave toward someone, not how you feel about them. 
Ultimately, it is the desire, not the desired, that we love. 
I want you to be weak. As weak as I am. 
Love is worth everything. Everything. 
Then he made one last effort to search in his heart for the place where his affection had rotted away, and he could not find it. 
I love you more than I hate everything else. 
i am a museum full of art but you had your eyes shut 
I'm the kind of boy that can fall in love with any girl because I love with the heart, not the eyes. 
If having a soul means being able to feel love and loyalty and gratitude, then animals are better off than a lot of humans. 
Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. 
Just because I'm not forever by your side doesn't mean that's not precisely where I want to be. 
Work without love is slavery. 
I threw myself into that fire, threw myself into it, into him, and let myself burn. 
If a man hasn't what's necessary to make a woman love him, it's his fault, not hers. 
He was contemplation and enthusiasm. Ambition and strong coffee. I could have looked at him forever. 
Your naked body should only belong to those who fall in love with your naked soul. 
Love, like fire, goes out without fuel. 
Love, when spelled backwards and read phonetically, reads evil 
And in the end, we were all just humans.. drunk on the idea that love, only love, could heal our brokenness. 
The Simple Path Silence is Prayer Prayer is Faith Faith is Love Love is Service The Fruit of Service is Peace 
There comes a time in your life when you have to choose to turn the page, write another book or simply close it. 
Statistically speaking, there is a 65 percent chance that the love of your life is having an affair. Be very suspicious. 
There can be no deep disappointment where there is not deep love. 
She's my kitten, and no one else's. 
Why is there ever this perverse cruelty in humankind, that makes us hurt most those we love best? 
Now I'd rather be infected with love for the tiniest sliver of a second than live a hundred years smothered by a lie. 
You were the sun, and I was crashing into you. 
Love is the strongest force the world possesses and yet it is the humblest imaginable. 
Love consists of not looking each other in the eye, but of looking outwardly in the same direction. 
When you feel someone else's pain and joy as powerfully as if it were your own, then you know you really loved them. 
But you're the only one, Scarlet. You'll always be the only one. 
If you love deeply, you're going to get hurt badly. But it's still worth it. 
i carry your heart with me(i carry it in my heart) 
Love is always open arms. If you close your arms about love you will find that you are left holding only yourself. 
Often it is the most deserving people who cannot help loving those who destroy them. 
Love is a promise, love is a souvenir, once given never forgotten, never let it disappear. 
To love is to suffer and there can be no love otherwise. 
It is a defect of God's humor that he directs our hearts everywhere but to those who have a right to them. 
Every normal man must be tempted, at times, to spit on his hands, hoist the black flag, and begin slitting throats. 
Everybody is a main character to someone 
I feel like a part of my soul has loved you since the beginning of everything. Maybe we’re from the same star. 
The minute I stopped trying to find the right girl, and started trying to become the right guy the girl came. 
We ate well and cheaply and drank well and cheaply and slept well and warm together and loved each other. 
You will never be able to escape from your heart. So it's better to listen to what it has to say. 
Unrequited love is the infinite curse of a lonely heart. 
Don't worry about hurting me, if that's what you're afraid of. I want to get hurt. At least I´ll feel something for a change. 
All of sudden, this shooting star went by, and all I could think was that they were listening to us somehow. 
She had loved him for such a long time, she thought. How was it that she did now know him at all? 
You were the missing piece of my soul, the breath in my lungs, and the blood in my veins. 
Life is a gift. Don't forget to live it. 
This I want to believe implicitly: Man was born for love and revolution. 
I knew I loved you before I met you I think I dreamed you into life I knew I loved you before I met you I have been waiting all my life 
I have so much in me, and the feeling for her absorbs it all; I have so much, and without her it all comes to nothing. 
How can something so wrong feel so right? 
He loved her for almost everything she was & she decided that was enough to let him stay for a very long time. 
Surely it was a good way to die, in the place of someone else, someone I loved. 
He looked so lost, so soulful, so lonely. I wanted him to kiss me now. I wanted to let him know I was his for all eternity. 
Only time can heal your broken heart. Just as only time can heal his broken arms and legs. 
There is no time for cut-and-dried monotony. There is time for work. And time for love. That leaves no other time. 
Make me into anything, but just love me. 
What I cannot love, I overlook. 
Sometimes I feel like we're a knot, too tangled to be taken apart. 
No matter where it is in the sky No matter where you are in the world the moon is never bigger than your thumb. -John 
If you love me as you say you do,' she whispered, 'make it so that I am at peace. 
If you cannot inspire a woman with love of you, fill her above the brim with love of herself ~ all that runs over will be yours. 
Would you mind repeating that? I'm afraid I might have lost my wits altogether and just hallucinated what I've longed to hear. 
You looove me. (holds out arms) You love me this much. 
Autumn is the hardest season. The leaves are all falling, and they're falling like they're falling in love with the ground. 
Close your eyes and I'll kiss you, Tomorrow I'll miss you. 
The first time he'd held her hand, it felt so good that it crowded out all the bad things. It felt better than anything had ever hurt. 
Let us always meet each other with smile, for the smile is the beginning of love. 
Every time I think I'm missing a piece of me, you give it back. 
That's when you know for sure somebody loves you. They figure out what you need and they give it to you -- without you asking. 
A mighty pain to love it is, And 't is a pain that pain to miss; But of all pains, the greatest pain It is to love, but love in vain. 
Being in love, I find myself smiling for no reason at all 
They've got no idea what happiness is, they don't know that without this love there is no happiness or unhappiness for us--there is no life. 
These pictures are my heart. And if my heart was a canvas, every square inch of it would be painted over with you. 
When God knows you're ready for the responsibility of commitment, He'll reveal the right person under the right circumstances. 
If you love someone but rarely make yourself available to him or her, that is not true love. 
Love is too precious to be ashamed of. 
We come to love not by finding a perfect person, but by learning to see an imperfect person perfectly. 
Loving someone is giving them the power to break your heart, but trusting them not to. 
Love is a striking example of how little reality means to us. 
Who could refrain, That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make love known? 
The heart can think of no devotion Greater than being shore to the ocean- Holding the curve of one position, Counting an endless repetition. 
For women, the best aphrodisiacs are words. The G-spot is in the ears. He who looks for it below there is wasting his time. 
She's mad, but she's magic. There's no lie in her fire. 
If you love someone, you must be prepared to set them free. 
Love cannot be forced, love cannot be coaxed and teased. It comes out of heaven, unasked and unsought. 
Hope for love, pray for love, wish for love, dream for love…but don’t put your life on hold waiting for love. 
The more boys I meet the more I love my dog. 
Absence makes the heart grow fonder, but it sure makes the rest of you lonely. 
I think you're still the only person sharp enough to sharpen someone like me. 
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. O, that I were a glove upon that hand That I might touch that cheek! 
I mean, it's not surprising, really. Once you love something, you always love it in some way. You have to. It's, like, part of you for good. 
In all the world, there is no heart for me like yours. In all the world, there is no love for you like mine. 
He was the toast to her butter. 
Like some wines our love could neither mature nor travel. 
Plant seeds of happiness, hope, success, and love; it will all come back to you in abundance. This is the law of nature. 
Love is not a habit, a commitment, or a debt. It isn't what romantic songs tell us it is - love simply is. 
I don't remember who said this, but there really are places in the heart you don't even know exist until you love a child. 
and when all the wars are over, a butterfly will still be beautiful. 
Tears are words the heart can't express 
My head’ll explode if I continue with this escapism. 
If you aren't the woman I think you are, then this isn't the world I thought it was. 
I think you can only be truly mad at someone you really love. 
Wanting him to come back before anyone notices part of the world has not moved since he left. 
Those whom we most love are often the most alien to us. 
The words ‘I Love You’ kill, and resurrect millions, in less than a second. 
Love is illogical, love had consequences--I did this to myself, and I should be able to take it. 
I don't understand the point of being together if you're not the happiest. 
You who suffer because you love, love still more. To die of love, is to live by it. 
Sometimes two people have to fall apart, to realize how much they need to fall back together. 
I got my heart's desire, and there my troubles began. 
Every life has one true love snapshot. 
Sweets to the sweet. 
Never forget that justice is what love looks like in public. 
Love God and He will enable you to love others even when they disappoint you. 
Someone once wrote that a novel should deliver a series of small astonishments. I get the same thing spending an hour with you. 
You can love a person dear to you with a human love, but an enemy can only be loved with divine love. 
Absence is to love what wind is to fire; it extinguishes the small, it inflames the great. 
I imagine a line, a white line, painted on the sand and on the ocean, from me to you. 
Know that love is truly timeless. 
Even when I'm dead, I'll swim through the Earth, like a mermaid of the soil, just to be next to your bones. 
Freely we serve Because we freely love, as in our will To love or not; in this we stand or fall. 
Relationships are all about trust and equality. If one person shares, then the other person should share, too. 
The opposite of love is not hate, its apathy, when you simply don't bother about that person! 
That night when you kissed me, I left a poem in your mouth, and you can hear some of the lines every time you breathe out. 
Where you go, I shall go; where you die, I shall die, and there will I be buried. 
Love who you love while you have them. That's all you can do. Let them go when you must. If you know how to love, you'll never run out. 
Love's gift cannot be given, it waits to be accepted. 
Love makes us such fools. 
Hate is It's too easy. Love. Love takes courage. 
Why, darling, I don't live at all when I'm not with you. 
A friend of mine once defined love as finding someone you can talk to late into the night 
I have always found that actively loving saves one from a morbid preoccupation with the shortcomings of society. 
We're all golden sunflowers inside. 
What do I care how 'e looks? I am good-looking enough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars show is zat my husband is brave! 
Love is like breathing. You take it in and let it out. 
Love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared to love in dreams. 
Two things you will never have to chase: True friends & true love. 
A woman should soften but not weaken a man. 
A weed is but an unloved flower. 
I'm guilty of giving people more chances than they deserve but when I'm done, I'm done. 
Those we love never truly leave us, Harry. There are things that death cannot touch. 
When it comes to men, deal with them as they are, not how you’d like them to be. 
But the you who you are tonight is the same you I was in love with yesterday, the same you I’ll be in love with tomorrow. 
After all, my erstwhile dear, My no longer cherished, Need we say it was not love, Just because it perished? 
Nobody ever gets what they want when it comes to love. 
And yet another moral occurs to me now: Make love when you can. It's good for you. 
Your kids require you most of all to love them for who they are, not to spend your whole time trying to correct them. 
It’s strange how dreams get under your skin and give your heart a test for what’s real and what’s imaginary. 
I do love nothing in the world so well as you- is not that strange? 
It is better to lose your pride with someone you love rather than to lose that someone you love with your useless pride. 
Do you really think anyone in this world, compares to you in my eyes? 
Cut the ending. Revise the script. The man of her dreams is a girl. 
Submission is not about authority and it is not obedience; it is all about relationships of love and respect. 
You are the most important thing to me now. The most important thing to me ever. 
Would you rather live one perfect day over and over or live your life with no perfect days but just decent ones? 
It ought to make us feel ashamed when we talk like we know what we're talking about when we talk about love. 
I love you because no two snowflakes are alike, and it is possible, if you stand tippy-toe, to walk between the raindrops. 
Stronger than lover's love is lover's hate. Incurable, in each, the wounds they make. 
I don't want to be somebody's crush. If somebody likes me, I want them to like the real me, not what they think I am. 
If equal affection cannot be, Let the more loving one be me. 
Five minutes are enough to dream a whole life, that is how relative time is. 
How could I be sleeping with this particular man . Surely only true love could justify my lack of taste. 
It's so much easier to convince yourself you're madly in love with someone when you know nothing about him. 
twice I have lived forever in a smile 
It was the nicest thing she could imagine. It made her want to have his babies and give him both of her kidneys. 
When you like someone, you like them in spite of their faults. When you love someone, you love them with their faults. 
I'm backing down now. I really do love you. That's why I'm doing this. 
Heart, we will forget him, You and I, tonight! You must forget the warmth he gave, I will forget the light. 
People wait around too long for love. I'm happy with all of my lusts! 
Kiss a lover, Dance a measure, Find your name And buried treasure. Face your life, It's pain, It's pleasure, Leave no path untaken. 
You honestly expect me to breathe in a world without air? 
It hurts to breathe. It hurts to live. I hate her, yet I do not think I can exist without her. 
We are not people who touch each other carelessly; every point of contact between us feels important, a rush of energy and relief. 
You get use to someone—start to like them, even—and they leave. In the end, everyone leaves. 
Deep in her heart, she wasn't sure she deserved to be happy, nor did she believe that she was worthy of someone who seemed normal. 
A kiss on the beach when there is a full moon is the closest thing to heaven. 
What if love wasn't the act of finding what you were missing but the give-and-take that made you both match? 
It's one thing to fall in love. It's another to feel someone else fall in love with you, and to feel a responsibility toward that love. 
I love you, in my mind where my thoughts reside, in my heart where my emotions live, and in my soul where my dreams are born. I love you. 
When someone blushes, doesn't that mean 'yes'? 
My girlfriend is sad and quiet and keeps me up all night worrying about her. 
I don't think you can define love. 
It's hard to love a woman and do anything. 
I'm sorry. I know you loved her. It was hard not to. 
This time I wouldn't forget him, because I couldn't ever forgive him - for breaking my heart twice. 
I want someone whose heart is big enough to hold me. 
Physical love is unthinkable without violence. 
I love you so much that nothing can matter to me - not even you Only my love- not your answer. Not even your indifference 
I crossed a thousand leagues to come to you, and lost the best part of me along the way. Don't tell me to leave. 
Well my music was different in high school; I was singing about love—you know, things I don't care about anymore. 
If a writer falls in love with you, you can never die. 
I never want to be away from you again, except at work, in the restroom or when one of us is at a movie the other does not want to see. 
The problem with marriage is that it ends every night after making love, and it must be rebuilt every morning before breakfast. 
You know that when I hate you, it is because I love you to a point of passion that unhinges my soul. 
If you have the woman you love, what more do you need? Well, besides an alibi for the time of her husband’s murder. 
I have been loving you a little more every minute since this morning. 
You're like a grey sky. You're beautiful, even though you don't want to be. 
Love is honesty. Love is a mutual respect for one another. 
There will never be no love at all. 
I love you and it's getting worse. 
I believe in love the verb, not the noun. 
There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart. 
She did not believe he could have really gone, because for her, to leave the person you loved was impossible. 
He offered her the world. She said she had her own. 
The right thing at the wrong tme is the wrong thing. 
The center hold.” “How do you know?” “Because we are the center. 
Love is a rebellious bird that nobody can tame. 
I don't let nobody see me wishin' he was mine 
A best friend is the only one that walks into your life when the world has walked out. 
Those who really love you don't mean to hurt you and if they do, you can't see it in their eyes but it hurts them too. 
People die, I think, but your relationship with them doesn't. It continues and is ever-changing. 
As the light begins to intensify, so does my misery, and I wonder how it is possible to hurt so much when nothing is wrong. 
We are not held back by the love we didn't receive in the past, but by the love we're not extending in the present. 
I'm in love with you, and I'm not in the business of denying myself the simple pleasure of saying true things. 
I need the thing that happens when your brain shuts off and your heart turns on. 
Don't marry a rich man. Marry a good man. He will spend his life trying to keep you happy. No rich man can buy that! 
Love is a snowmobile racing across the tundra and then suddenly it flips over, pinning you underneath. At night, the ice weasels come. 
You say you’re ? Sure that you’re in love? How can you know it? You think love is so simple? 
Love is—a shade of what I feel. 
When you know my love, my love will warm you. 
What if I were smiling and running into your arms? Would you see then what I see now? 
A warrior does not give up what he loves, he finds the love in what he does 
If you have it [love], you don't need to have anything else, and if you don't have it, it doesn't matter much what else you have. 
Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy to a friend. 
Remember. The way you make love is the way God will be with you. 
Every day People straighten up the hair, why not the heart? 
I couldn't stand here, hanging on, when the very thing I held disappeared more with each passing day. 
Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my folly. 
The Heart wants what it wants - or else it does not care 
Wisdom is knowing I am nothing, Love is knowing I am everything, and between the two my life moves. 
Hatred would have been easier. With hatred, I would have known what to do. Hatred is clear, metallic, one-handed, unwavering; unlike love. 
A man in love can do extraordinary things, I don’t care if you’re an angel, you’re my angel, and I won’t let you go. 
It shattered something inside me that hadn't been broken before. 
A truth should exist, it should not be used like this. If I love you is that a fact or a weapon? 
You have my whole heart. You always did. 
Love is a possible strength in an actual weakness. 
Why are they all high-calorie foods? 
Yearning for love made her feel like a cat that was always twining around ankles, meowing 
I believe in the immeasurable power of love; that true love can endure any circumstance and reach across any distance. 
That’s love: Two lonely persons keep each other safe and touch each other and talk to each other. 
And I'm dying to know, is it killing you like it's killing me? And the story of us looks a lot like a tragedy now. 
They are orphans again, with no true home but each other and whatever life they can make together on the other side of the sea. 
One of the best times for figuring out who you are & what you really want out of life? Right after a break-up. 
I wanted to be his life preserver, the thing that would keep him afloat. Instead, he became my anchor. And I’m tired of drowning. 
Men build too many walls and not enough bridges. 
If love is blind, then maybe a blind person that loves has a greater understanding of it. 
The truth was, he now belonged only to my past, and it was time I begin to accept it, as much as it hurt to do so. 
I just looked at her, feeling utterly empty. I didn’t know what I was supposed to say to her. 
When you fish for love, bait with your heart, not your brain. 
I would lay down everything I possess, even my soul, for you. If that isn't love, it's the best I have. 
If it weren't for music, I would think that love is mortal. 
He was too perfect, despite being one of the most imperfect people I knew. 
She was the kind of girlfriend God gives you young, so you'll know loss the rest of your life. 
Just because love don't look the way you think it should, don't mean you don't have it. 
Perfect love is the most beautiful of all frustrations because it is more than one can express. 
But why, why, why can't people just say what they mean? 
I cannot compromise my respect for your love. You can keep your love, I will keep my respect. 
Love takes off the masks we fear we cannot live without and know we cannot live within. 
And the story of love is a long sad tale ending in graves. 
Before I fell in love with words, with setting skies and singing birds— it was you I fell in love with first. 
This thing about you that you think is your flaw - it's the reason I'm falling in love with you. 
God turns you from one feeling to another and teaches by means of opposites so that you will have two wings to fly, not one 
You might be looking for reasons but there are no reasons. 
Sometimes good things fall apart, so better things can fall together. 
Whoever loves becomes humble. Those who love have , so to speak , pawned a part of their narcissism. 
Love is the most powerful force in the world. That love can do anything. 
What is love? two souls and one flesh; friendship? two bodies and one soul. 
Ever since time began, people have recognized their true Love by the light in their eyes. 
Can't you see? Every step I have taken, since I was that child on the bridge, has been to bring myself closer to you. 
People do the damndest things when they’re in love. 
Nothing else wounds so deeply and irreparably. Nothing else robs us of hope so much as being unloved by one we love 
We are asleep until we fall in Love! 
He was afraid of defiling the love which filled his soul. 
True beauty is something that attacks, overpowers, robs, and finally destroys. 
How could you go about choosing something that would hold the half of your heart you had to bury? 
Looking at beauty in the world, is the first step of purifying the mind. 
And if you couldn't be loved, the next best thing was to be let alone. 
My shoulder will never be the same. I expect you to nurse me back to health. 
Don't be reckless with other people's hearts. Don't put up with people who are reckless with yours. 
Love is hard to find, hard to keep, and hard to forget. 
Define yourself radically as one beloved by God. This is the true self. Every other identity is illusion. 
He is ugly and sad but he is all love. 
The first stab of love is like a sunset, a blaze of color -- oranges, pearly pinks, vibrant purples 
Learn to deal with the fact that you are not a perfect person but you are a person that deserves respect and honesty. 
Love those you hate you. 
If I had a camera,' I said, 'I'd take a picture of you every day. That way I'd remember how you looked every single day of your life. 
The only way of knowing a person is to love them without hope. 
Better than chocolate, being with you last night. Silly me, I thought that nothing was better than chocolate. 
Living simply makes loving simple. 
Love is a state in which a man sees things most decidedly as they are not. 
Love is so unpredictable. That's what makes it so great. 
Love the trees until their leaves fall off, then encourage them to try again next year. 
Physics isn't the most important thing. Love is. 
No matter what, nobody can take away the dances you've already had. 
And Max, the king of all wild things, was lonely and wanted to be where someone loved him best of all. 
Your absence has not taught me to be alone, it merely has shown that when together we cast a single shadow on the wall. 
Who said I can't wear my Converse With my dress, well baby That's just me! 
Why is the measure of love loss? 
I believe that every single event in life happens in an opportunity to choose love over fear. 
Be worthy love, and love will come. 
You are my butterfly and refuse to set you free. 
I am two fools, I know, For loving, and for saying so. 
My love is pizza shaped. Won’t you have a slice? It’s circular, so there’s enough to go around. 
love is the sum of our choices, the strength of our commitments, the ties that bind us together. 
In love, one and one are one. 
I come here with no expectations, only to profess, now that I am at liberty to do so, that my heart is and always will be yours. 
For she had eyes and chose me. 
None of us can choose where we shall love 
Tell me then, does love make one a fool or do only fools fall in love? 
Remembering. Forgetting. I'm not sure which is worse. 
Right now we are here, and nothing can mar our perfection, or steal the joy of this perfect moment. 
Loving's pretty easy. It's letting someone love you that's hard. 
They said that love was terrifying and tender, wild and sweet, and none of it made any sense. But now I knew that every mad word was true. 
No man is offended by another man's admiration of the woman he loves; it is the woman only who can make it a torment. 
I'd rather die on my own terms than live on theirs. I'd rather die loving Alex than live without him. 
But everyone disappears, no matter who loves them. 
Friendship is selfless love, care, respect, and honor not a profitable opportunity. 
Fight for the only thing she knew was good enough, noble enough, powerful enough to be worth risking everything Love. 
You are protected, in short, by your ability to love! 
The most confused you will ever get is when you try to convince your heart and spirit of something your mind knows is a lie. 
Hearts Live By Being Wounded 
He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he ended and she began. 
The more you are motivated by Love, The more Fearless & Free your action will be. 
The language of love letters is the same as suicide notes. 
Love is illogical. You fall into it like a manhole. Then you're just stuck. You die in love more than you live in love. 
Nothing in life is worth, turning your back on, if you love it. 
Eternity is in love with the productions of time. 
Almost all the time, you tell yourself you're loving somebody when you're just using them. This only looks like love. 
Love as thou wilt 
I haven't had that one great love, which is good. I don't want that to be in the past, I want it to be in the future. 
Love simply is. 
Love is not blind; that is the last thing that it is. Love is bound; and the more it is bound the less it is blind. 
Can't you just like a girl who likes you back?' 'None of them likes me back. I may as well like the one I really want. 
Their fingers seemed to fit together in just the right way- effortlessly clasped,like perfect complements. 
But, my God, it's so beautiful when the boy smiles 
You can never be wise and be in love at the same time. 
And maybe that was love. Being so vulnerable and allowing someone else in so far they could hurt you, but they also give you everything. 
Love: the sickest of Irony’s sick jokes. The place where logic and order go to die. 
But whatever However Whenever this ends I want you to know That right now I love you forever 
I love you, Marks. My heart is completely and utterly yours. And unfortunately for you, the rest of me comes with it. 
I feel like I’ve been split open and stuffed with sunshine. 
There are some experiences in life they haven't invented the right words for. 
Our love was a two-person game. At least until one of us died, and the other became a murderer. 
Sometimes I get real lonely sleeping with you. 
Truth without love is brutality, and love without truth is hypocrisy. 
I’m a fake fact factory. The things I make are the things I make up. Also, as a side business, I make love. Actually, I just made that up. 
She was bendable light: she shone around every corner of my day. 
All the problem of women, starts with men. All the problem of men, ends with women. 
I had to touch you with my hands, I had to taste you with my tongue; one can't love and do nothing. 
Nothing had changed. I was the stupid one again. I was the girl who never understood who she was to people. 
But hurry, let's entwine ourselves as one, our mouth broken, our soul bitten by love, so time discovers us safely destroyed. 
What's your heart telling you to do? I don't know.' Maybe, you're trying too hard to hear it. 
One's life has value so long as one attributes value to the life of others, by means of love, friendship, and compassion 
Soul meets soul on lovers lips. 
Zen masters say you cannot see your reflection in running water, only in still water. 
Love is not finding someone to live with. It's finding someone you can't live without. 
Find the things that matter, and hold on to them, and fight for them, and refuse to let them go. 
You know that I could as soon forget you as my existence! 
We all have an old knot in the heart we wish to untie. 
I make love with a focus and intensity that most people reserve for sleep. 
Westley: This is true love — you think this happens every day? 
Love is a drama of contradictions. 
Love may forgive all infirmities and love still in spite of them: but Love cannot cease to will their removal. 
He experienced the singular pleasure of watching people he loved fall in love with other people he loved. 
Friendship often ends in love. But love in friendship; never. 
Love is just a word until someone comes along and gives it meaning. 
Everything I know, I know because of love. 
The greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and be loved in return. 
You smiled and talked to me of nothing and I felt that for this I had been waiting long. 
If we’re going to kiss, it has to be book-worthy. 
The thing with your heart's desire is that your heart doesn't even know what it desires until it turns up. 
One rarely falls in love without being as much attracted to what is interestingly wrong with someone as what is objectively healthy. 
Real friendship or love is not manufactured or achieved by an act of will or intention. Friendship is always an act of recognition. 
For which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me? 
I think Heaven will be like a first kiss. 
The worst thing you can do if you miss or need someone is let them know it. 
They say: 'If a man knew himself, he would know all mankind.' I say: 'If a man loved mankind, he would know something of himself. 
Love comes with a knife, not some shy question, and not with fears for its reputation! 
People who love themselves, don’t hurt other people. The more we hate ourselves, the more we want others to suffer. 
Love is an endless mystery, because there is no reasonable cause that could explain it. 
Love is a trap. When it appears, we see only its light, not its shadows. 
Love! Love until the night collapses! 
The moment our lips met, I knew with pure and piercing certainty that I would have waited for him forever. 
Dexter, I love you so much. So, so much, and I probably always will. I just don't like you anymore. I'm sorry. 
It’s hard to communicate anything exactly and that’s why perfect relationships between people are difficult to find. 
You can’t leave yet. I’m not finished falling in love with you. 
It takes great courage to see the world in all its tainted glory, and still to love it. And even more courage to see it in the one you love 
We wanted the freedom to love. We wanted the freedom to choose. Now we have to fight for it. 
Love lasts about seven years. That's how long it takes for the cells of the body to totally replace themselves. 
She put one hand on mine. “When someone is in your heart, they’re never truly gone. They can come back to you, even at unlikely times. 
You had to be willing to fight in order for a love story to last a life time. 
If I had a single flower for every time I think about you, I could walk forever in my garden. 
Stains are even worse when you're the only one who can see them. 
When you leave, weary of me, without a word I shall gently let you go. 
Love is when the other person's happiness is more important than your own. 
No matter how bad your heart is broken, the world doesn't stop for your grief. 
It's usually the selfish people who are loved the most. They do what you deny yourself, and you love them for it. You give them your heart. 
I didn't know love could leave the lights on all the time. 
Everyone's a little crazy. Some people just hide it better than others. 
May you live as long as you wish and love as long as you live. 
That kind of love should've been able to beat sickness. That kind of love should've conquered anything. 
True love is born from understanding. 
I will be with her again, or I will die. There aren’t any other options 
If you didn't remember something happening, was it because it never had happened? Or because you wished it hadn't? 
Take my hand and we'll make it - I swear 
some people fall in love over and over again while some people can only do it once. 
She asked if I loved another woman, so I answered honestly and said, “Dinner was great, but I could go for dessert. 
I'm beginning to think that maybe it's not just how much you love someone. Maybe what matters is who you are when you're with them. 
No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight. 
Self-talk reflects your innermost feelings. 
If you press me to say why I loved him, I can say no more than because he was he, and I was I. 
Real museums are places where Time is transformed into Space. 
The question, love, is whether you want me enough to take the risk. 
How 'bout a shot of truth in that denial cocktail. 
But you cant shut everyone out. I mean you have to have someone to lovesomeone to hold on to someone-- 
In the absence of love, we began slowly but surely to fall apart. 
I hold it true, whate'er befall; I feel it when I sorrow most; 'Tis better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all. 
If I could bronze my love, it’d be worthy of a silver medal. 
My love is meatloaf flavored. I just wish my meatloaf was also meatloaf flavored. 
And I didn't choose it, Kat. I chose you. 
If you love me, Henry, you don’t love me in a way I understand. 
Love comforteth like sunshine after rain. 
Maybe you could be mine / or maybe we’ll be entwined / aimless in this sexless foreplay. 
He brought out the worst in me, and was the best thing that ever happened to me. 
Do not allow me to forget you 
I might kiss you. I might be bad at it. That's not possible. 
Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. 
If I were rain, That joins sky and earth that otherwise never touch, Could I join two hearts as well? 
Happiness is part of who we are. Joy is the feeling 
I'm like a starving man who has been given food. Maybe he's cold, and his clothes are torn, and he's ashamed, but he's not unhappy. 
We live in a dark and romantic and quite tragic world. 
Gamble everything for love, if you're a true human being. 
Everything that happens to you matters to me. 
In a universe of ambiguity, this kind of certainty comes only once, and never again, no matter how many lifetimes you live. 
Nobody knows you. You don't know yourself. And I, who am half in love with you, What am I in love with? My own imaginings? 
You can be in love and you can be in a relationship. But they’re not always the same thing. 
When we are in love, we are convinced nobody else will do. But as time goes, others do do, and often do do, much much better. 
I could’ve sworn I was telling the truth when I told you I didn’t miss you. 
I know I’m not supposed to say this, but I love you. 
The heart of man is very much like the sea, it has its storms, it has its tides and in its depths it has its pearls too 
I was his exception, and as much as I had tried to fight my feelings, he was mine. 
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood. 
Two minds with but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one. 
Love is like a virus. It can happen to anybody at any time. 
I once loved a girl who almost loved me, but not as much as she loved John Cusack. 
That this girl would know exactly how to shatter me. 
Perhaps watching someone you love suffer can teach you even more than suffering yourself can. 
A real relationship is two-way. 
If love is like a possession, maybe my letter are like my exorcisms 
A man is lucky if he is the first love of a woman. A woman is lucky if she is the last love of a man. 
Every life needs a little space. It leaves room for good things to enter it. 
I like being the girl nobody can have. 
Loving someone always requires you to not love others. 
When male authors write love stories, the heroine tends to end up dead. 
It is very difficult to live among people you love and hold back from offering them advice. 
Emotion without reason lets people walk all over you; reason without emotion is a mask for cruelty. 
You don't need to justify your love, you don't need to explain your love, you just need to practice your love. Practice creates the master. 
Everything is clearer when you're in love. 
You might as well make yourself fly as to make yourself love. 
There's only one thing that can heal the heart Only one It's love, Gaara. 
Love is a combination of care, commitment, knowledge, responsibility, respect and trust. 
Love only grows by sharing. You can only have more for yourself by giving it away to others. 
how sad and bad and mad it was - but then, how it was sweet 
Love is keeping the promise anyway. 
But you've slipped under my skin, invaded my blood and seized my heart. 
If music be the food of love, play on. 
You stay safe, You love. You survive. You laugh and cry and struggle and sometimes you fail and sometimes you succeed. You Push. 
I haven’t been very impressed lately. By people, or places, or the way someone said he loved me and then slowly changed his mind. 
People Die Beauty Fades Love Changes And You Will Always Be Alone 
I love you, even if there isn’t any me, or any love, or even any life. I love you. 
about her has to do with me. 
To wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect 
But you're so busy changing the world Just one smile can change all of mine 
Only in the agony of parting do we look into the depths of love. 
For love is no part of the dreamworld. Love belongs to Desire, and Desire is always cruel. 
I want him to see the flowers in my eyes and hear the songs in my hands. 
Isn't hate merely the result of wounded love? 
You're my Star, a stargazer too, and I wish that I were Heaven, with a billion eyes to look at you! 
Is it possible not to ever know your type-not to even know you have a type-until quite suddenly you do? 
We should love, not fall in love, because everything that falls, gets broken. 
I love you not only for what you are, but for what I am when I am with you 
The best use of life is love. The best expression of love is time. The best time to love is now. 
You are what happiness means to me. And I would rather have today with you than forever with anyone else. 
Why did he have to be so gorgeous? Why did he have to stand so close, and why did I still love him so much? 
You have to be very fond of men. Very, very fond. You have to be very fond of them to love them. Otherwise they're simply unbearable. 
You know what the secret is? It's so simple. We love one another. We're nice to one another. Do you know how rare that is? - Carmen 
There is love of course. And then there's life, its enemy. 
To love is easy, to be in a relationship is extremely difficult. 
When you love you should not think you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
I really don't even know you, and yet, in my life, you are forever entangled; to my history, inextricably bound. 
Maybe sometimes we can only see the truth about ourselves if someone shows us where to look. 
The heart is a strange beast and not ruled by logic. 
Every time I close my eyes, it's like a dark paradise. No one compares to you, but there's no you, except in my dreams tonight 
No matter how much you love someone, you still want to have you own way. 
I feel…and I have reason to believe…that we could come to mean something to each other. 
Have you ever felt the longing for someone you could admire? For something, not to look down at, but up to? 
What barrier is there that love cannot break? 
Get up, Shahrzad al-Khayzuran. You kneel before no one. Least of all me. 
But what can be done, the one who loves must share the fate of the one he loves. 
You don’t need scores of suitors. You need only one… if he’s the right one. 
Say it,” I gritted out. “The High Lord of the Night Court is your mate. 
She let out a laugh, and then she put her hand over her mouth, like she was angry at herself for forgetting her sadness. 
Often you don't know whether a woman is friend, enemy or lover until it is too late. Sometimes, she is all three. 
To make one person the center of your world is bound to end in disaster. There are too many factors outside your control. 
Love without sacrifice is like theft 
When all is said and done, the weather and love are the two elements about which one can never be sure. 
What sexual preference do you hope she has?” “Happiness.” Isnt that cool? 
Are those the only options? Nothing or forever? 
Tucker: Why would you tell me now if it's against the rules? Clara: Because I love you. 
If a man whistles at you, don't turn around. You are a lady not a dog. 
I will find you. In the farthest corner, I will find you. 
And we all know love is a glass which makes even a monster appear fascinating. 
From the stars, to the stars. 
People who meet in airports are seventy-two percent more likely to fall for each other than people who meet anywhere else. 
Love makes the world go round? Not at all. Whiskey makes it go round twice as fast. 
I miss you. I miss you. I miss you, I miss you. Be ready, because when I see you, I'll never let you go again. 
I'm telling you this for one reason and one reason only: No matter how sure you are of someone's love, it's always nice to hear it. 
Everyone has choices to make; no one has the right to take those choices away from us. Not even out of love.. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
Right now, it's hard to imagine that it is raining anywhere in the world. 
Because love, love is never finished. It circles and circles, the memories out of order and not always complete. 
Just for the record, she still loves you. She wouldn't bother to torture you if she didn't. 
This is how the girl who couldn't speak and the man who couldn't see fell in love. 
Love fades. Mine has. 
What does the brain matter compared with the heart? 
You can love somebody without it being like that. You keep them a stranger, a stranger who's a friend. 
God's definition of what matters is pretty straightforward. He measures our lives by how we love. 
Love is like quicksilver in the hand. Leave the fingers open and it stays. Clutch it and it darts away. 
when you decide you want to be with someone forever, you want forever to start right now. 
The purpose of relationship is not to have another who might complete you, but to have another with whom you might share your completeness. 
There was nowhere I could go that wouldn't be you. 
To find out if she really loved me, I hooked her up to a lie detector. And just as I suspected, my machine was broken. 
Love is like a good cake; you never know when it's coming, but you'd better eat it when it does! 
Loving you forever can't be wrong. Even though you're not here, can't move on 
When I like people immensely I never tell their names to anyone. It is like surrendering a part of them. I have grown to love secrecy. 
The knowledge that she would never be loved in return acted upon her ideas as a tide acts upon cliffs. 
I loved him as we always love for the first time; with idolatry and wild passion. 
The most introspective of souls are often those that have been hurt the most. 
Her existence alone was excuse enough to justify the creation of the entire world. 
You said move on, where do I go? 
I'll come and make love to you at five o'clock. If I'm late start without me. 
I saw the world from the stars' point of view, and it looked unbearably lonely. 
Do people always fall in love with things they can't have?' 'Always,' Carol said, smiling, too. 
I gave you my heart, but it wasn't enough. 
You know someone's right for you when the things they don't to say are even more important than the things they do. 
I don't want to live, I want to love first and live incidentally. 
Love cannot live where there is no trust. 
I realized I’m in love. It's always been right in front of me. 
Thank you for gracing my life with your lovely presence, for adding the sweet measure of your soul to my existence. 
the world is not a pleasant place to be without someone to hold and be held by. 
You can give without loving, but you cannot love without giving. 
My father gave me the greatest gift anyone could give another person, he believed in me. 
Everything want to be loved. Us sing and dance and holler, just trying to be loved. 
The bottom line is that we never fall for the person we're supposed to. 
Without love we all like birds with broken wings. 
I’ve been working hard to become the kind of man she needs, the kind of man she already believes me to be. 
Sometimes, remembering hurts too much. 
Does that count as an argument? Can we kiss and make up now? 
The spiritualization of sensuality is called love: it is a great triumph over Christianity. 
By night, Love, tie your heart to mine, and the two together in their sleep will defeat the darkness 
All any of us wanted, really, was to know that we counted. That someone else's life would not have been as rich without us here. 
When someone beats a rug, the blows are not against the rug, but against the dust in it. 
It never gets easier, missing you. And sometimes I wonder if it ever will. 
Love, and you shall be loved. 
What we all want, really, is to be loved. That craving drives our worst behavior. 
If in thirst you drink water from a cup, you see God in it. Those who are not in love with God will see only their own faces in it. 
Love is not something you protect. It’s something you risk. 
I look at you, and I think about you, and I don't know. No one has ever confounded me the way you do. 
Love was the most savage monster of all. 
Choice or no, my heart is his. 
It hurts to love. It's like giving yourself to be flayed and knowing that at any moment the other person may just walk off with your skin. 
It's easy to cry when you realize that everyone you love will reject you or die. 
If you listen to the wind very carefully, you'll be able to hear me whisper my love for you. 
Not like this. He wanted it to be real. 
The fiercest anger of all, the most incurable, Is that which rages in the place of dearest love. 
I reserve the right to love many different people at once, and to change my prince often. 
I realized when you look at your mother, you are looking at the purest love you will ever know. 
The opposite of love is not hate. It is indifference. 
A man always finds it hard to realize that he may have finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may have treated her. 
You two go ahead and make out–I'll just sit here and bleed quietly. 
I just don't see why the past has to matter. 
Some people feel love in their hearts, Julie. Some of us feel it all way into our souls. We're the ones who can't forget. 
So many believe that it is love that grows, but it is the knowing that grows and love simply expands to contain it. 
I want my world to start and end with you. 
he is both the source of my happiness and the one i want to share it with. 
Love, that moves the sun and the other stars 
I want him to love me as much as I love him. 
She knew whose love she doubted. It wasn't her parents' and it wasn't her friends: It was her own. 
You have a beautiful laugh. Like the promise of tomorrow. 
Sometimes you have to learn to love what's good for you. 
Faith goes up the stairs that love has built and looks out the windows which hope has opened. 
I wanted movement and not a calm course of existence. I wanted excitement and danger and the chance to sacrifice myself for my love. 
, . Those mornings when we kiss and surrender for an hour before we say a single word. 
Don't be afraid to lose him, because if a man truly loves you, he's not going anywhere 
What are you wishing for?' Grace interrupted. 'To kiss you,' I said to her. 
If you have reasons to love someone, you don’t love them. 
Love is a game of tic-tac-toe, constantly waiting for the next x or o. 
He is the cheese to my macaroni. 
Just knowing you exist changed the world for me. 
I’m sort of… coming off a bad relationship” “When did it end?” “Slightly before it started. 
Kitten, your hands are heaven and your eyes are my home. 
love is blind and lovers cannot see the pretty follies that themselves commit 
You have within you,right now,everything you need to deal with whatever the world can throw at you. 
She writes things with her movements that I for the life of me could never write with a pen. 
some things are better left in the past. And true things are destined to repeat themselves. 
She had never imagined she had the power to make someone else so happy. And not a magical power, either--a purely human one. 
It is love, not reason, that is stronger than death. 
I’m not a warrior or a goddess,” I said at last. Adrian leaned closer. “As far as I’m concerned, you’re both. 
A gentleman holds my hand. A man pulls my hair. A soulmate will do both. 
To love someone enough to let them go, you had to let them go forever or you did not love them that much. 
When what you want is a relationship, and not a person, get a dog. 
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman, that his love has an earlier death. 
I think about you every second of every day and I don’t know how to get over you,” she says. “Don’t,” I beg her. “Please don’t get over me. 
You'll never be able to let him go. You'll always feel wrong about being with me. 
You can give without loving, but you can never love without giving. 
I am the poet of the poor, because I was poor when I loved; since I could not give gifts, I gave words. 
Ah me, but where are now the songs I sang When life was sweet because you call’d them sweet? 
Love can rebuild the world, they say, so everything's possible when it comes to love. 
To love makes one solitary. 
True love always makes a man better, no matter what woman inspires it. 
There are all kinds of ways for a relationship to be tested, even broken, some, irrevocably; it’s the endings we’re unprepared for. 
After all, a woman who doesn't love cats is never going to be make a man happy. 
Soul connections are not often found and are worth every bit of fight left in you to keep. 
And think not you can direct the course of love, for love, if it finds you worthy, directs your course. 
He didn't realize that love as powerful as your mother's for you leaves its own mark. 
The heart makes its choices without weighing the consequences. It doesn't look ahead to the lonely nights that follow. 
—I don't want to lose you —Then why are you the one that keeps letting go? 
You left with my soul in your fists and my heart in your teeth, and I don’t want either of them back.” ~Ben 
What’s wrong is that every morning and every night, I lie in bed wondering why you’re not beside me. 
We all know interspecies romance is weird. 
May I kiss you then? On this miserable paper? I might as well open the window and kiss the night air. 
Everything happens for a reason and, something better will come along for me! 
I shouldn't have to be a liar to make someone love me. I shouldn't be so afraid of losing someone that I'll do anything to make them stay. 
I love you for who you are, not who the world thinks you should be. 
Mine was the twilight and the morning. Mine was a world of rooftops and love songs. 
He didn't marry you to become king. He became king because he wanted to marry you. 
No human should mislead another by promising them something they know to be untrue. 
I know what I have given you I do not know what you have received. 
You promised, Seaweed Brain. We would not get separated! Ever again!” “You’re impossible!” “Love you too! 
People fall in love without reason, without even wanting to. You can't predict it. That's love. 
Sometimes I think gravity may be death in disguise. Other times I think gravity is love, which is why love's only demand is that we fall. 
Three years? That's a thousand tomorrows, ma'am. 
Set the standard! Stop expecting others to show you love, acceptance, commitment, & respect when you don't even show that to yourself. 
The supreme happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved; loved for ourselves—say rather, loved in spite of ourselves. 
Perhaps people like us cannot love. Ordinary people can - that is their secret. 
Sometimes I think my whole life has been about holding on to you. 
We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us love. 
Don’t marry him. Don’t be with him. Be with me. 
I guess the sacrifice of my dignity is the only thing that will save us now. The things I endure for love. The Fates laugh at my torment. 
The only sea I saw Was the seesaw sea With you riding on it. Lie down, lie easy. Let me shipwreck in your thighs. 
How far have you walked for men who’ve never held your feet in their laps? 
It's not at all hard to understand a person; it's only hard to listen without bias. 
He went through life with his hands firmly shoved into his pockets. She danced. 
He didn't mind how he looked to other people, because the nursery magic had made him Real, and when you are Real shabbiness doesn't matter. 
The surest way to hurt yourself is to give up on love, just because it didn’t work out the first time. 
I want your most vital organ. I want it to be mine. 
She blushed and so did he. She greeted him in a faltering voice, and he spoke to her without knowing what he was saying. 
What made me run away was doubtless not so much the fear of settling down, but of settling down permanently in something ugly. 
Like time suspended, a wound unmended-- you and I. We had no ending, no said goodbye; For all my life, I'll wonder why. 
He loved her, he loved her, and until he'd loved her she had never minded being alone . 
Never stop smiling not even when you're sad, someone might fall in love with your smile. 
If you love something let it go.. if it comes back its yours 
It is impossible to manufacture or imitate love. 
The practice of love offers no place of safety. We risk loss, hurt, pain. We risk being acted upon by forces outside our control. 
Kids chase the love that eludes them. 
No you sick, stupid creep, I love you. I shouldn't. I shouldn't. You're sick inside, Caine, sick! But I love you. - Diana 
Just because you love someone, doesn't mean you have to be involved with them. Love is not a bandage to cover wounds. 
Anatasia You Are My More My Love, My Life Christian 
Human existence is so fragile a thing and exposed to such dangers that I cannot love without trembling. 
It is better to have an enemy who will fight you in an open field then a lover who will kill you in your sleep. 
There is only one happiness in life, to love and be loved. 
Where is Aelin. Where is my wife? 
I pray you, do not fall in love with me, for I am falser than vows made in wine. 
Lift your hips for me, love. 
For some people, “the point of no return” begins at the very moment their souls become aware of each others’ existence. 
‎I never wanted to have anything in my life that I couldn't stand losing. But it's too late for that. 
Time is how you spend your love. 
Falling in love was like falling off a cliff. It felt pretty much like flying until you hit the ground. 
I prayed for all his dreams to come true. I prayed that I would always be able to connect with him--even if I was no longer on earth. 
I can hate you more, but I'll never love you less. 
Real love finds you once, if you're lucky. 
Falling in love should be the easiest thing in the world, but it's not. 
Sometimes you know in your heart you love someone, but you have to go away before your head can figure it out. 
If love be rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love for pricking and you beat love down. 
What you are to do without me I cannot imagine. 
I loved you long before you loved me. It's the only thing I have you beat at, and I'll bring it up every chance I get. 
Having an eye for beauty isn't the same thing as a weakness except possibly when it comes to you. 
Time expands, then contracts, all in tune with the stirrings of the heart. 
Doubt thou the stars are fire; Doubt that the sun doth move; Doubt truth to be a liar; But never doubt I love . 
I miss everything about you Can't believe that I still want you And after all the things we've been through 
Love is on every side, and no one's side. Don't ask what Love can do for you. 
One heart cannot serve two masters. 
In God there is no hunger that needs to be filled, only plenteousness that desires to give. 
Because because she came here with me. 
Love heals scars love left 
We can live without religion and meditation, but we cannot survive without human affection. 
The most difficult aspect of moving on is accepting that the other person already did. 
I was feeling insecure you might not love me anymore 
She thought she was independent and strong, but she got one small taste of love and she was hungrier than anyone. She was ravenous. 
Love is a fruit in season at all times and within reach of every hand. 
He will love only once - but it will be for always. 
It took me years to figure out that upset was upset, and tumultuousness was not the same thing as passion. Love isn't drama. 
Your greatest awakening comes, when you are aware about your infinite nature. 
You must learn to forgive a man when he's in love. He's always a nuisance. 
I'm with you. No matter what else you have in your head I'm with you and I love you. 
You see, there are some people that one loves, and others that perhaps one would rather be with. 
If it's ka it'll come like a wind, and your plans will stand before it no more than a barn before a cyclone 
We're not words, Henry, we're people. Words are how others define us, but we can define ourselves any way we choose. 
It's become impossible to deny he means something to me. 
Traveling in the company of those we love is home in motion. 
Suddenly it was too hard to be in his presence, too painful to know that he would belong to someone else. 
and the two of them loved each other for a long time in silence without making love again. 
I begin to long for some little language such as lovers use, broken words, inarticulate words, like the shuffling of feet on pavement. 
Whoever loves much, performs much, and can accomplish much, and what is done in love is done well. 
In this story I am the poet You're the poetry. 
Books are to me as homemade tattoos are to an inmate. Can't get enough of them. 
Tucker strokes my hair. There's something so tender about the gesture. It might as well have been him whispering . 
I know your soul. Everything else is just an ornament. 
It’s just so strange. You used to love me, and now you’re a stranger who happens to know all of my secrets. 
Nothing of real worth can ever be bought. Love, friendship, honour, valour, respect. All these things have to be earned. 
I love you beyond paint, beyond melodies, beyond words. And I hope you will always feel that, even when I'm not around to tell you so. 
Why is it that words like these seem dull and cold? Is it because there is no word tender enough to be your name? 
We have all known the long loneliness and we have learned that the only solution is love and that love comes with community. 
I love you every day. And now I will miss you every day. 
I know and I love you. But I don't think we love each other in the same way. And I think keeping you near me, would destroy me. 
Some girls are full of heartache and poetry and those are the kind of girls who try to save wolves instead of running away from them. 
Love is the only future God offers. 
Darkness may hide the trees and the flowers from the eyes but it cannot hide love from the soul. 
The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr. 
We were very different, and we disagreed about a lot of things, but he was always so interesting, you know? 
The worst thing: to give yourself away in exchange for not enough love. 
I mean, I hope you're happy, But the sky is still the sky without you, And I'm not surprised by that anymore. 
A person learns how to love himself through the simple acts of loving and being loved by someone else. 
The Eskimo has fifty-names for snow because it is important to them; there ought to be as many for love. 
Happiness is the china shop; love is the bull. 
To long a sacrifice can make a stone of a heart 
it’s a blessed thing to love and feel loved in return. 
If I love you, is that a fact or a weapon? 
You don't fall in love with someone because it's convenient. 
For Beatrice, when we first met, I was lonely, and you were pretty. Now I am pretty lonely. 
You'd be surprised what people will do for money that they wouldn't do for love. Myrnin. 
I love you more than songs can say, but I can't keep running after yesterday 
It’s impossible,” he snapped. “Why?” “Because I’m Sebastian, Lord St. Vincent. I can’t be celibate. Everyone knows that. 
If people did not love one another, I really don't see what use there would be in having any spring. 
no woman can love a weak man hard enough to make him strong. 
The sun's gone dim, and the moon's gone black. For I loved him, and he didn't love back. 
i didn't fall in love of course it's never up to you but she was walking back and forth and i was passing through 
Ronan's second secret was Adam Parrish. 
Marriage is not a process for prolonging the life of love, sir. It merely mummifies its corpse. 
A heart, once stolen, can never be taken back. 
Gilbert, I'm afraid I'm scandalously in love with you. 
Do you think we can be friends?” I asked. He stared up at the ceiling. “Probably not, but we can pretend. 
You know, when it works, love is amazing. It's not overrated. 
When you want something this badly, you don't just give up. You fight and fight until you absolutely can't fight anymore. 
You can't anyone love you. You just have to reveal who you are and take your chances. (105) 
Quit being so hard on yourself. We are what we are; we love what we love. We don't need to justify it to anyone not even to ourselves. 
Time has no meaning, Love will endure.. 
I am yours. Don't give myself back to me. 
Love at first sight is easy to understand; it's when two people have been looking at each other for a lifetime that it becomes a miracle. 
I've never wanted more, until I met you. 
It’s not so much the journey that’s important; as is the way that we treat those we encounter and those around us, along the way 
I wanted to see the place where Margaret grew to what she is, even at the worst time of all, when I had no hope of ever calling her mine. 
Love. It was the beginning and end of everything, the foundation and the ceiling and the air in between. 
One loves truly only once in a lifetime, Julian, even if one isn’t aware of it. 
And I still love you in my own fucked-up way. I miss you, I really do. Can we still be friends? 
The quickest path to self-destruction is to push away the people you love. 
A wonderful gift may not be wrapped as you expect. 
and all I could think was that I would like to spend every morning for the rest of my life waking up beside her 
If you claim to be a real friend then be real in your soul. If you claim to be fake then be an enemy instead. 
I would know you anywhere for my true love. Whoever I was and whoever you were, I would know you at once for my true love. 
I wondered if the person who really loves you is the person who knows all your stories, the person who WANTS to know all your stories. 
You'll probably die if you stay with me,' he told me. 'Then I'm dead either way, because I won't survive without you. 
To love and be loved is to feel the sun from both sides. 
If someone does not want me it is not the end of the world. But if I do not want me, the world is nothing but endings. 
Once you figure out who you are and what you love about yourself, I think it all kind of falls into place. 
One is never wounded by the love one gives, only by the love one expects. 
I feel like myself, strong and weak at once - allowed, at least for a little while, to be both. 
She wanted to lose herself in him. To tie his arms around her like a tourniquet. If she showed him how much she needed him, he'd run away. 
Language is the key to the heart of people. 
Real love is to offer your life at the feet of another. 
It's delicious to have people adore you, but it's exhausting, too. Particularly when your own feelings don't match theirs. 
I am the least difficult of men. All I want is boundless love. 
Peace,love,empathy 
Akkarin: I watched the first woman I loved die. I dont think I can survive losing the second. Sonea: I love you too. 
LOVE is a friendship set to music 
What will survive of us is love. - from 
Love is Love no matter old you are, and I knew if I gave you enough time, you'd come back to me. 
Don't touch me; I'll die if you touch me. 
They had an ordinary life, full of ordinary things-if love can ever be called that. 
I am lonely, yet not everybody will do. I don’t know why, some people fill the gaps and others emphasize my loneliness. 
Your inner strength is your outer foundation 
Why is it so hard to articulate love yet so easy to express disappointment? 
To love another human in all of her splendor and imperfect perfection , it is a magnificent task tremendous and foolish and human. 
In the darkness, he is invisible, but I can still feel him beside me. Sometimes you don't have to see something to know it is there. 
Not sure how I felt about Antonio and Echo, I linked my fingers with hers. Antonio cocked a surprised eyebrow. 
Love, too, has to be learned. 
if they put an iron circle around your neck I will bite it away 
It's true that nothing in this world makes us so necessary to others as the affection we have for them. 
The main facts in human life are five: birth, food, sleep, love and death. 
When I walk, I walk with you. Where I go, you're with me always. 
I have loved to the point of madness; that which is called madness, that which to me, is the only sensible way to love. 
There is peace even in the storm 
That I shall love always, I argue thee that love is life, and life hath immortality 
I had fallen too far. I was in love with Rush Finlay. 
Love is the most selfish of all the passions. 
You're better than seven years of food. You're better than windows. You're even better than the sky. 
I love you, Missy girl. Even if I can't be with you, know that I'm here. So, that's it. More than the stars, Taylor. More than the stars. 
People don't need love. What they need is success in one form or another. It can be love but it needn't be. 
A broken heart is just the growing pains necessary so that you can love more completely when the real thing comes along. 
Love me sweet With all thou art Feeling, thinking, seeing; Love me in the Lightest part, Love me in full Being. 
There will be no more British guys. Unless they are members of the royal family, of course. 
Deep in my heart I'm concealing things that I'm longing to say. Scared to confess what I'm feeling - frightened you'll slip away. 
It may be that you are settled in another place it may be that you are happy but the one who took your heart wields final power. 
Him that I love, I wish to be free -- even from me. 
Like your the ocean and he's desperate to drown. 
Hide yourself in God, so when a man wants to find you he will have to go there first. 
Love is forever. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be love. The world is beautiful. If it wasn't, it wouldn't be the world. 
There are not enough days in forever to allow me to fully express the depth of my love for you. 
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest. 
Any time not spent on love is wasted. 
To become vegetarian is to step into the stream which leads to nirvana. 
Faith is why I'm here today and faith is why I made it through. 
Wine enters through the mouth, Love, the eyes. I raise the glass to my mouth, I look at you, I sigh. 
Were knowledge all, what were our need To thrill and faint and sweetly bleed? 
A couple of times in your life, it happens like that. You meet a stranger, and all you know is that you need to know everything about him. 
So shut up, live, travel, adventure, bless and don't be sorry 
Yesterday we obeyed kings and bent our necks before emperors. But today we kneel only to truth, follow only beauty, and obey only love. 
It is a bad thing to have love and nowhere to put it. 
I wonder how much of the day I spend just callin' after you. 
I love you. It hurts more than anything ever has, but I do. So don't you dare tell me I don't. Don't you ever say it again! 
How beautiful would it be if we could just see souls instead of bodies? To see love and compassion instead of curves. 
Loving you was like going to war; I never came back the same. 
Desire is the kind of thing that eats you and leaves you starving. 
It was the first time I was ever in love, and I learned a lot. Before that I'd never even thought about killing myself. 
Accidents ambush the unsuspecting, often violently, just like love. 
Love cures people, both the ones who give it and the ones who receive it. 
I am a restlessness inside a stillness inside a restlessness. 
You and I, it's as though we have been taught to kiss in heaven and sent down to earth together, to see if we know what we were taught. 
I love you now for what we've already shared, and I love you now in anticipation of all that's to come. 
to love means to realize there is a time to let the beloved one go 
All children should be taught to unconditionally accept, approve, admire, appreciate, forgive, trust, and ultimately, love their own person. 
She wanted to cause him pain for taking a place in her heart she wouldn't have given him if she'd known the truth. 
I had forgotten how much light there is in the world, till you gave it back to me. 
A man is only as good as what he loves. 
Blessed is the influence of one true, loving human soul on another. 
There's two kinds of women--those you write poems about and those you don't. 
Was it the infinite sadness of her eyes that drew him or the mirror of himself that he found in the gorgeous clarity of her mind? 
You're still alive. And that means you'll love and be loved and in the end, nothing else really matters. 
Why did dusk and fir-scent and the afterglow of autumnal sunsets make people say absurd things? 
Vane grabbed me. “DuLac, let’s chat.” British-speak for “Stand still while I yell at you. 
Nothing revives the past so completely as a smell that was once associated with it. 
Little did I realise how much I would miss those ten minutes, those ten minutes in which I lived an entire lifetime. 
You can’t fool people into loving you. 
I have made a lot of mistakes falling in love, and regretted most of them, but never the potatoes that went with them. 
So I learned two things that night, and the next day, from him: the perfection of a moment, and the fleeting nature of it. 
Though sorrow may impede my heart, It is of great love to have known you. 
Why be alone when we can be together baby You can make my life worthwhile And I can make you start to smile 
The Artist always has the masters in his eyes. 
But she needs me more than she needs him and I guess being needed is almost as good as being loved. Maybe better. 
I profess not to know how women's hearts are wooed and won. To me they have always been matters of riddle and admiration. 
You have to live each hour as if it's your last and each day as if you were immortal. - Kate Sheffield 
A perfect person is easy to love. But when somebody likes all your imperfections, well, that's when you know they really mean it. 
Oh to have you with me, to have you here, not to be alone, but to be with you, my beauty, you of all souls! You. 
The strength of a man isn't seen in the power of his arms. It's seen in the love with which he EMBRACES you. 
Life is slippery. We all need a loving hand to hold onto. 
Love needs room to grow. Like a rose. Or a tumor. 
In love there are two things - bodies and words. 
Yours (now I'm even losing my name - it was getting shorter and shorter all the time and is now: Yours) 
I wonder if it's medically possible to be addicted to another human being. 
We outgrow love like other things and put it in a drawer, till it an antique fashion shows like costumes grandsires wore. 
Of all the bright cruel lies they tell you, the cruelest is the one called love. 
I'd shut the whole world down just to tell you 
For awhile, I thought that was love. -Gaara 
Love of love written by the broken hearted, love of life written by the dead. 
She knew with painful certainty that the opposite of love was not hate, but indifference. 
Some things are private. Some things needed to be said, even when the person who needed to hear them couldn’t hear anything. Ever again. 
I fell in love with his unchanging soul. 
If you don't love me, it does not matter, anyway I can love for both of us 
Falling in love is painful on the knees. 
This last night we tear into each other, as if to wound, as if to find the key to everything before morning. 
I know I'm not going to be in your head all the time. But once you know me, I'll be forever in your heart. 
If music be the food of love, play on, Give me excess of it; that surfeiting, The appetite may sicken, and so die. 
Only a true best friend can protect you from your immortal enemies. 
You here to finish me off, Sweetheart? 
Every great love starts with a great story 
Say 'provoking' again. Your mouth looks provocative when you do. 
You know what charm is: a way of getting the answer yes without having asked any clear question. 
My soul will find yours. 
And he took her in his arms and kissed her under the sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls in the sight of many. 
You’re dangerous,” he says. “Why?” “Because you make me believe in the impossible 
The Very first moment I beheld him, my heart was irrevocably gone. 
thus with a kiss I die 
In our time together, you claimed a special place in my heart, one I'll carry with me forever and that no one can ever replace. 
The heart is an arrow. It demands aim to land true. 
One can't fight with oneself, for this battle has only one loser. 
The fact is, I love him. He's the boy I want and one day he'll be MINE. 
You are speaking of my future lover. Be more respectful. 
I honestly have no idea how to live without you. 
For never was a story of more woe than this of Juliet and her Romeo. 
You always get more respect when you don't have a happy ending. 
Oh, aye, Sassenach. I am your master  and you're mine. Seems I canna possess your soul without losing my own. 
We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him. 
If a man wants you, nothing can keep him away. If he doesn't want you, nothing can make him stay. 
If I let myself love you, I won't throw myself in front of her. I'll throw myself in front of you. 
Don't kiss me like a woman if you're going to treat me like a child. 
Why do people always assume that volume will succeed when logic won’t? - Damon 
Carpe Scrotum. Seize life by the testicles 
I have tried to let you go and I cannot. I cannot stop thinking of you. I cannot stop dreaming about you. 
what a luxury it was for people to hold their loved ones whenever they wanted 
Things work out the way they're meant to 
It's only terrible to have nothing to wait for. 
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs. 
Because you are the superhero fledgling. I’m just your more attractive sidekick. Oh, and the herd of nerds are your dorky minions. 
I seem to have run in a great circle, and met myself again on the starting line. 
He is my world and my world is him and without him there is no world. 
I require three things in a man: he must be handsome, ruthless, and stupid. 
Stay with me. Always. 
Attraction is not an option. 
What if you find your soul mate at the wrong time? 
We ruined each other by being together. We destroyed each other’s dreams. 
I've been in love with you since the very beginning. You asked why there isn't anyone else in my life, and the reason is you. 
He was now in that state of fire that she loved. She wanted to be burnt. 
His lips tasted cool and sharp, peppermint, winter, but his hands, soft on the back of my neck, promised long days and summer and forever. 
For thousands of nights I dreamed of making love to you. No man on earth has ever hated sunrise as I do. 
I was as unburdened as a piece of dandelion fluff, and he was the wind that stirred me about the world. 
Nice dress. Take it off. 
As a man, I instantly became aware of the gold in her hair, her height measured against mine, and how easily she'd fit in my arms. ~Ren 
But I couldn't help myself, couldn't help the way I felt as I recalled the bliss and rush of a vampire's bite. 
You know what they say about boys next door 
Do you think there's a difference? Between belonging with and belonging to? 
your hand touching mine. this is how galaxies collide. 
I don't care where I come from or who you are. I can make you happy, and you make me happy. We could have a happily ever after. 
A lot of men wouldn't like being called a romantic. It's not macho enough.' Quite often men are fools. 
Let me rephrase.” He took a seething step toward me. “When it comes to you… I don’t like to share. 
She'd secretly had a crush on him since they were twelve years old. Last summer, she'd fallen for him hard. 
When would he learn that women never stayed where you put them? 
Vampires. Honestly, they're like children sometimes. 
Usually my form of turning someone down was shoving a stake through his heart while smirking, Gotcha! 
The more a person pushes others away, the clearer it becomes he is in need of love the most. 
Yeah, tell me I’m a bottle of single malt scotch, she thought. That’s the way to my heart. 
She had been forced into prudence in her youth, she learned romance as she grew older: the natural sequel of an unnatural beginning. 
There is darkness in light, there is pain in joy, and there are thorns on the rose. 
I would prefer a sword to fight duel, but a pen to plan a war. 
I can't imagine a romance novel published today where the hero rapes the heroine and she falls in love with him. 
Yes, men are pigs. Except your brother, of course. He's actually a decent human being. Almost a woman. -Jillian's mother 
Listen carefully. I'd crush you like a bug for causing my wife one single moment of pain. Believe it. Fear it. 
The tune was sad, as the best of Ireland was, melancholy and lovely as a lover's tears. 
Once she kissed me, my heart slowed, and every muscle in my body relaxed. How much I needed her terrified me. -pg 252/ARC 
This is going to sound crazy, but from the moment I first set eyes on you I haven't been able to stop thinking about you. 
Maybe he thinks he can rescue me? No one is that stupid. 
She wanted to go over and hug his tears away, but she was too frightened. 
It doesn’t matter where I am; I’m yours. 
What he did to my heart was sheer, inexplicable, magic. 
I'll never recover if he breaks my heart. ~Brooke 
Doesn't it scare you sometimes how time flies and nothing changes? 
I’m writing this because you begged. You know how I love the begging 
Don't answer the door in a wedding dress and veil, he might not think you're joking. 
Most don't deserve your tears and the ones that do will never make you cry. 
To fall in love with someone's thoughts - the most intimate, splendid romance. 
Mercy is for the weak… let me show you how much of an Unseelie I still am. 
Unrequited love is so boring. Weeping under a blue-black sky is for suckers or maniacs. 
I will bathe in your warmth ma petite. Roll you around me until my heart beats only for you. My breath will grow warm from your kiss. 
Sometimes letting go is the only way to find out who you're meant to hold on to. 
Bonnie, believe in me. I’ll save you. I remember how to fly. 
Phones are distracting. The internet is distracting.The way he looked at you? He wasn't distracted. He was consumed. 
Because we all need to believe in movies, sometimes. 
You keep runnin that mouth and I'm goin to take you back there and screw you. 
Not so much two ships passing in the night as two ships sailing together for a time but always bound for different ports. 
Maybe 'Okay' will be our 'always' 
A woman with romance in her life lived as grandly as a queen, because her heart was treasured. 
I want to be with you forever and beyond 
In any relationship in which two people become one, the end result is two half people. 
No matter what happened, he was Dex and I was Perry and that combination only led to trouble. 
Among my stillness was a pounding heart. 
Now turn around and go to sleep. I'm warning you that I plan to sleep with you in my arms all night long. 
If you love someone, why would you want that person to change? 
Hermione was screaming again: the sound went through Harry like physical pain. 
See mirror, every time you will miss me and look deeper into your eyes till you will find me. 
Possess. Have. Hold. Enjoy. Control. Dominate. Pick your verb, Ms. Fairchild. I intend to explore so very many of them. 
Life is a book waiting to happen. 
Raven?' Yes?' What do you believe in?' I believe in - finding out! 
Over everything, I choose you 
Dreams only come true if you point yourself in their direction 
It is when things are at worst you will get the best. 
Hearts can't be broken because they're made of marzipan. 
Never ask a question if you don’t know the answer. — Rhett 
She, as no other ever could, reached every corner of his heart. His joy, and his salvation. 
Anthony looked down at his evil clutches -- hands, he reminded himself, hands -- and grinned anew. 
Humans are vulnerable, because they’re capable of being hurt. 
Never say no when you really want to say yes. 
Star-crossed lovers desperate to get home together. Two hearts beating as one. Romance. 
A bond between souls is ancient - older than the planet. 
I'll love you to ruins. 
I didn’t know what to call it, what was happening between us, but I liked it. It felt silly and fragile and good. 
What business had I to think of one that never thought of me? 
My heart cracked. Daemon never begged. 
My love is something valuable to me which I ought not to throw away without reflection. 
It feels incredible to be outside when I’m supposed to be inside. The sensation of freedom is intoxicating. - Sara 
Growing up and seeing your parents' flaws is like losing your religion. I don't believe in God anymore. I don't believe in my father either. 
Romance is the deepest thing in life. It is deeper than reality. 
A man. A really manly man with a lot of mannishness in his manliness. 
You Stole my loneliness. I may have given you wings, but you've become my gravity. I'll never be free of your force. 
Forget men, I want to marry my MacBook. It’s dependable, reliable and you can even go shopping with it. 
Delusion detests focus and romance provides the veil. 
Join us next time for Days of the Undead when Rachel learns her long lost brother is really a crown prince from outer space. 
Love is ______ (fill in the blank yourself). 
The man is always the last to know when Cupid has struck him -Anonymous, Memoirs of a Mistress 
When you choose a man who thinks eight seconds is a long time, perhaps you need two of them. Hmm? 
You’re my best friend, You’re my love, You’re my life. I can’t wait to make you my wife! Love, Ryan 
I have you with me, and I'm terrified you'll disappear. 
And blood and tears and screams did not matter anymore, because at least they are together. 
Look at me. We aren´t them lauren. You´re not your mother or father any more than I´m my mother. You´re you and I´m me and I love you. 
Laugh as much as you breathe and love as long as you live. 
And empty words are evil. 
Vane’s lips tightened to suppress a smile. “Why so hostile, love?” “You whacked me on the head with a ball!” “You deserved it. 
And if you say that's because you lot barged into her home like a herd of mentally deficient sheep, I'm disowning all three of you. 
Who ends up with their first real boyfriend? Yeah, no one. - Courtney 
If not for me being stoned and clinging to a taco, it would have been terribly romantic. 
Here’s what I know: death abducts the dying, but grief steals from those left behind. 
Patience is a virtue and the best things in life are worth waiting for. 
Come to think of it, she did not speak a word. Yet I could have sworn she had the most beautiful voice. 
I feel as though I am ice and he is fire. We are so completely different, yet the same. 
Hades was the personification of dark and dangerous--a living, breathing Batman. 
Please, touch me, I pray. 
I love you breathlessly, my amazing man. 
And it is you, spirit--with will and energy, and virtue and purity--that I want, not alone with your brittle frame. 
But do we know how to make love stay?' I can't even think about it. The best I can do is play it day by day. 
Kitty need's a tounge bath 
Falling in love is not a rational process. It can't be planned or avoided. It happens--for good or bad it simply happens. - Katrina Svensen 
Live, Princess, for me. I love You 
No need, no, need. Life is already too short to find it. 
This time the fluttery feeling in my stomach was more intense. It made the inside of my thighs tingle and my breathing deepen. 
Sometimes limbs must be re-broken to set properly, her heart too needed to shatter anew before it could truly heal. 
and that's where love finds you in the tragedies. 
It all comes down to who is by your side and who is willing to stand up for love even when it seems impossible. 
because being with you makes perfect sense 
Never let a boy know you’re crazy about him. He’ll lose interest, and then you’ll be a loser. 
I don't want to be in love but you're makin' me 
Born to be wild; born to be free; nobody owns you; you are, a romantic tree. 
Nothing good ever comes of love. What comes of love is always something better 
We were hooked when we woke. We had arms for each other. But I yearned to resume My dreams of another. 
Please. Forgive me. One more chance, Blaire. I want this. I want you. 
If I gave you a pity position it wouldn't be in my office. 
He wanted to be a poet,' someone else put in while Maggie hugged Tim and patted his back. 'Said he'd only lacked the words to be one. 
Those freckles make you seem like a galaxy of stars, just waiting to be explored and loved. 
She’d fallen into a deep silence once, when the sun appeared, and it was then he’d wondered most what she was thinking. 
She was not sorry. And if it was the wine telling her that, then she would tell the wine the same thing tomorrow. She was not sorry. 
A woman could be as beautiful as she felt herself to be. 
I knew you would do me good in some way, at some time--I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld you. 
Great. I'd been dumped in Hell's waiting room. 
You look like the vamp who bled the cat. 
She leaned into me, and when I closed my eyes, I knew I wanted nothing more than to hold her this way forever. 
No more, no less. I'm an idiot. I really need to let this crush go. 
When I'm with you, bells go off in my head like a moving truck that's backing up. 
Blake took her face in his hands. “You let me touch you. Kiss you. Your skin? It feels like piano keys. My hands know just where to go. 
The saddest line you scraped in your diary was not that you cried but those moments when we both shared smile. 
If death is your lover, you don't got to be afraid ever that he will ever leave you 
I’ll affect you slowly as if you were having a picnic in a dream. There will be no ants. It won’t rain. 
You know, I never believed in fate until I met you then I started thinking coincidence didn't have near so cruel a sense of humor 
If you were mine, I'd never leave you, Prudence. I couldn't. 
It called to him, a sweet heady beacon of femininity, fertility, and fuckability. His three favorite f-words. 
Marriage is a partnership, not a democracy. 
Every broken heart has screamed at one time or another: Why can't you see who I truly am? 
The fuse is lit. You can run all you want to but you leave a trail of gunpowder in your wake. There’s going to be a reckoning eventually. 
True love is finding your soulmate in your best friend 
A handsome prince, such as yourself, deserves someone who is no less than one hundred percent dedicated to him. 
Just that I have loved you, even when I was nothing and no one to you, when you didn’t know my name and barely knew my face. - Leo 
And if you ever - and I do mean ever - try to leave me, I’m goin’ with you. 
Someone once told me love isn’t perfect—or predictable. 
what is romance, but a mutual pact of delusion? When the pact ends, there's nothing left. 
When they see us dance. When they see how you look at me. When they see how I smile at you. 
I'm not the same person I was before, and I am deathly afraid I will never be her again 
All day and all night my desire for you unwinds like a poisonous snake. 
Beatrix, do you know what happens to girls who ask such naughty questions?” “They’re ravished in haylofts?” she inquired hopefully. 
With every breath I take, I will always love you. 
I guess I like things that take time and attention. More worthwhile that way. 
At the end of the day your ability to connect with your readers comes down to how you make them feel. 
And we were kissing like drowning people breathe-- like suddenly we'd discovered something that has never been so sweet before that moment. 
I still love you. I will always love you, and that is all that matters. I will forgive you anything, and I will forgive you this. 
No bikinis on a first date.” He nods. “I’m sure that’s a rule. Or should be. For my sisters anyway. 
Those words, that voice, had more power over me than any phantom ever could. 
Winter is much like unrequited love; cold and merciless. 
Everything changes except the love. 
Hardin is like a drug; each time I take the tiniest bit of him, I crave more and more. He consumes my thoughts and invades my dreams. 
You’re stuck with me.” She sniffled. “Promise?” He rested his forehead against hers. “Cross my heart. 
Love is a wild fire that cannot be contained by any mere element known to man. 
People tend to criticize their spouse most loudly in the area where they themselves have the deepest emotional need. 
I feel like I should probably ask you to leave. But I don’t really want you to go. I want you to stay, but I know you shouldn’t. - Hope 
Don’t make a feller wait too long. A feller waiting on a gal can get ornery’er than a huntin’ dog that’s tree’d it’s squirrel. 
It's about time! It's supposed to be a ritual, not a marathon. 
Just tell him to keep his hands to himself and his python in his pants. 
I know my heart. It has always been yours, Kate. Always. 
..he wanted her. And at another time, as another man, he would have her. Without hesitation. As lover as more. 
If you don't do anything, you simply end up overwhelmed by something happening. 
We all romanticize the people we adore. 
There is nothing more beautiful than a vulnerable heart in open hands. 
What is real and what is not is for your heart to decide and for your heart to know. 
I tried to think of something to say. Excuse me? Hello? Marry me? Anything would have done. 
Hermione turned and beamed at Harry; her eyes, too, were full of tears. ‘…then I declare you bonded for life. 
You naked in my bed is even more unbelievably beautiful than I thought it would be and trust me I've thought about it. A lot. 
Sometimes Hen I think I would give my life just for one of your smiles. 
Your memory feels like home to me. So whenever my mind wanders, it always finds it’s way back to you. 
The only problem with one-man woman was that he was not a one-woman man. 
My Dearest Julianne, Thank you for your immeasurable gift. The only thing I have of value is my heart. It’s yours, Gabriel. 
If I am never to have you again after this night, this moment, you will remain the wife of my soul. Keeper of my heart. 
You want me to pin my entire operation, the entire revolution on some teenaged love story? I can't believe this. 
Love is elixir that keeps you alive. Love is poison that kills you. Unreciprocated love keeps you alive, but kills every day. 
He’d used the amulet to read my thoughts again. I pictured smacking him in the face. 
Because I don’t believe that you are a slave to what you’ve become. I don’t believe that you simply can’t. 
It is as if Quincey has replaced the sun in my universe and it is around him that I spin. 
She can be a nightmare, but this still feels better than any dream. 
I think of you only twice a day - when I am alone and when I am with someone else. 
The moment you stop chasing happiness, you become happy. 
You might not understand, but I gave you the best of me, and after you left, nothing was ever the same. 
Emma turned to him, bottom lip trembling. “For me?” “Always for you. All things for you. He coughed into his fist “All your own. 
Picnics are very dear to those who are in the first stage of the tender passion. 
I stare at her for a long moment. I want to kiss her. I want to kiss her more than I've ever wanted anything in my life. 
This is Sailor Supergirl,” George says. “She knows all about black holes. 
She said it was beautiful to be loved, and that it made everything on earth look brighter. 
Your beauty took my breath away, but your mind has stopped my heart. 
There's no reason to think we're going to stop loving each other,' he said. 'And there's every reason to think that we won't. 
When lovers kiss on the cheeks, it is because they are searching, feeling for one another's lips. Lovers are made by a kiss. 
Don’t call me babe. I’m not a floozy. Or a freaking talking pig. 
Why are you pretending to write, when I already know you're just doing that to intimidate me? 
I can't take anything you don't give me. Stop giving me power over your life. 
If you want the rainbow, you have to deal with the rain. 
Sonetimes the hardest person to forgive is yourself. 
I look for you in every life, but I don't always find you. And sometimes I find you too late. 
She’d felt it before, she felt it now: the pull to fall in with him, to fall into him, to lose her sense of self. 
There is no law stronger than that of magic. - Kian 
You've got an awfully kissable mouth. 
I didn’t mean to fall in love with you, but I did. - Chelsea 
My task is set before me, girl My mission clear and true There’ll be black knights and dragons, girl But I will always come for you… 
Clearly the sight of a well-muscled forearm incited a woman to utter depravity. How else to explain the invention of cuffs? 
We've got a bond in common, you and I. We are both alone in the world. 
I let myself have feelings for you despite not knowing how this would end. 
Asuka you're really cute. When I look at you I start wanting to protect you. 
Innocence invites protection, yet we might be smarter to protect ourselves against it 
It was like someone in a suit walked up to me and gave me a certificate, which stated “Roxanne Giselle Logan, Your Life is Fucked”. 
When you give yourself to me, completely, I will bite you. Until then, my love, I will only nibble on you.”~Cole 
My God, Jack - with a look like that, you two should just get a room. And try not to pick the one with a dead body next to it this time. 
You have captured me utterly, and you hold my heart in your hands. Be gentle with it. It's more fragile than you might think. 
I’m not sure I trust myself around you I liked you from the start, J.D. I really wish things had been different, that's all. 
one transcendent kiss that later makes lovers take soft breaths, holding hands 
And only now, when he was gray-haired, had he fallen in love properly, thoroughly, for the first time in his life. 
My words are the kisses but many of the times they don't taste so good as the touch of your lips does to mine. 
I certainly do care for you Jeff Campbell less than you are always thinking and much more than you are ever knowing 
You're okay now You're okay because I'll be holding you like this from now on. 
For the first time in a long time, I want more than I have. 
As a rule of thumb, it was always safer if the Commander-in-Chief formulated a risky plan. 
the intensity in your eyes burns my pen as i write. 
WORTH IT and perfect are different things. No one’s perfect, yet in romance, everyone becomes WORTH IT. And that’s the trick. 
I've tried that love thing for the last time. My heart says no, no! Nobody's supposed to be here, but you came along and changed my mind 
Missing you is worse than Pittsburgh. 
There's always be a me and you. 
Right. Because if you have trouble putting ketchup and mustard on a hot dog, you should totally move on to saving lives. 
i'm your enemy, meghan. never forget that. if Mab tells me to kill you in front of the entire court, it's my duty to obey. 
True love is like little roses, sweet, fragrant in small doses. 
Neither of us says the word love, not once. It would be tempting fate; it would be romance, bad luck. 
I had a romance novel inside me, but I paid three sailors to beat it out of me with steel pipes. 
I didn’t want to cry in front of you.” He wiped away the tears with the pad of his thumb. “I want you to cry in front of me. 
What really happened doesn't matter. What matters is how we agree to remember it. 
Was this some new level of depravity? Had he developed a spinster fetish? 
For the first time in my life, I said the words, “I need a drink. 
Yet I am stuck in the idea of romance, a dreamer; I want to actually fall in love with a man, then marry him 
Let me feel how thy pulses beat. 
Hanson got to sleep with you, and I didn't,” he said, his own jaw a little tight. “So I stole his car. 
Love is photogenic, it develops in the dark. 
That settles it, no more books about vampire before bedtime. 
Once, he hadn't been able to touch her without causing himself pain. Now, it only hurt when he didn't touch her. 
Goodness had nothing to do with it. 
It's taken me all this time, all this loss, to realize what really matters is now. 
Suffer love! A good ephitet! I do suffer love indeed, for I love thee against my will. 
And to think of all the colors in the world, blood chose to be red. 
If for some reason we get separated, I want you to wait for me. I’ll find you, I promise. - Gabriel Emerson 
Love is an emotion experienced by the many and enjoyed by the few. 
I generally find subtlety a waste of time. 
Dignity is overrated. You know what trumps dignity? Kissing. 
I'd rather die tomorrow than live a hundred years without knowing you. 
And there, in the midst of blinding orange, yellow, and white flames, our forever begins. 
That's what came from having romance in your soul. You believe in things like love at first sight and perfect presents. 
When they’re together, the world could fall apart around them and they’d never notice or care as long as they have each other. 
Humor was the enemy of desire. 
Romance has been elegantly defined as the offspring of fiction and love. 
His right ear still held both studs, and I wondered who had the missing earring. I would have asked, but was afraid he’d tell me Ivy had it. 
Man is the candle light and a woman is the moonlight. They live far away but can grow together during lonesome nights. 
You make the rest of the beautiful things in the world cry for even trying at all. You make it hard for me to breathe. 
You + Me saw this AMERICA Thank you for finding America with me 
My ideas about vampires may be romantic, but your attitudes toward women need a major overhaul. 
She shook off the self-recrimination. What-ifs and could-have-beens were not the way to move forward. She knew that from experience. 
No matter how happily a woman may be married, it always pleases her to discover that there is a nice man who wishes that she were not. 
Will you be my forever, Donia? 
[Bobby Tom] finally understood Gracie's function in his life. She was God's joke on him. 
You realise you’re going to owe me dinner after this, right?” “How does McDonald’s sound?” “Inadequate. 
There is something about me, doll face. It’s between my legs, and I do believe a few minutes ago you were praying to it. 
My soul will always find its way to yours because home is where the heart is. 
How could you fall in love with a three inch worm? 
He would ask nothing else from life if he would be allowed to protect and cherish her for the rest of his. 
You're my wings. You made me fly. 
My thoughts are all over the place as I fall asleep, and images of clouded roses and angry green eyes flow through my dreams. 
You're what I've been looking for my whole life, and if you let me, I'll love you for the rest of yours. 
There are much more important qualities to have than a docile disposition. 
Love one another. Love yourself. Then love will find you whole not half. 
I’ve never heard of a man being so eager to confess to the parent of a girl he’s just ruined 
We can do anything you like. Just be with me. 
Just remember that the only question in a house is who is to rule. The rest is only dancing around that, trying not to look it in the eye. 
His hands may have been the one to heal you, but it will be mine that awaken you. 
I won't be affected by your charm nor I will trap you into marriage. I've been there once, never again. - Kristine 
Foolishly romantic, yeah, sure, maybe: but she'd rather have dreams of Prince Charming than the reality of Mr. Wrong. 
The guy in bed with her was not Nathan. Which meant Elle was buck-naked and wantonly riding the wrong guy. 
I'm ending this.' 'No. Come on. It's not worth it.' 'You are,' he said fiercely, looking at her. 'You're worth it. 
She could not leave him hanging like this. “If you were hurt, I need to know.” It was a rule somewhere, in the good-guy handbook. 
Never sleep with a lady only once, especially in the case of an older lady. -'Rhett 
I love her and that's the beginning and end of everything. 
With kisses like that, I wish this was the Universe where you were my soulfinder. 
She has to agree to have me. It could take some time, but I’m confident I can trick her into it. 
It's your heart. No one else gets a say in that. 
This has to be the most self-centered thing I've ever said, but no, I think you just wanted to vex me. 
He was too gorgeous for words and worst yet he knew it. 
People loved you in the way they knew how - and often it was not the way you knew. Or needed. 
The moment I saw her, a part of me walked out of my body and wrapped itself around her. And there it still remains. 
Madelyne, we're married now. 'Tis a usual occurrence to bed one's wife on the wedding night. 
He loved her. He wanted her. He needed her. And he needed her now. 
I hope I haven't given you the impression that I consider kissing intrinsically irrational. 
Ô, Wanderess, Wanderess When did you feel your most euphoric kiss? Was I the source of your greatest bliss? 
A letter is a soul, so faithful an echo of the speaking voice that to the sensitive it is among the richest treasures of love. 
If a castle gets destroyed, you just build a new one. If you wanted me to I'd build them over and over. Let's build them together. 
I am a wild woman. it would take a warrior to tame my spirit. 
I don't know what the future holds. I only know that I want to be with you. You and me. Everything else is negotiable. 
When you are in love- everything is romantic 
This is not something anyone can teach you. Heartbreak you must learn on your own. 
These times of woe afford no time to woo. 
The funny thing about destiny is that you can't predict it, and you can't prevent it. - Leslie 
I had this daft idea to come and bury the past. Except the past is not quite dead. 
Your neck. I want to kiss it. 
She couldn't do any worse, but then, he couldn't do better. So maybe it balanced out. 
Sometimes just getting through each day requires almost superhuman strength. 
They say money talks, but all mine ever says is 'good-bye sucker. 
I know you. Inside and out, Sara. I know you, and I’ve accepted it all. Every bit of the crazy. And I love you anyway remember? 
I always watch you. You consume my every thought. 
Sophie, honey, stop looking at me like that,” Garrett said gruffly. “You’ll have me convinced I’m going to die.” “You’re not? 
It’s not so much where I want you,Sophie, as it is how. Nothing tastes quite like a woman, and no woman tastes like you. - Marc Hunter 
Nothing is forever. Except atoms. 
Who’s there?” “The scratcher of your itch,” he said. She opened the door a crack and stuck her nose out. “Was that supposed to be romantic? 
If I let you go are you going to hit me again?” “What do you think?” “Then I’m not going to let you go. 
I'm ready for something private, private and real 
I’d kill for you, Tess. I have killed for you. Don’t undermine me by fearing others. Fear me. Let me rule you! 
Before I met you, my life ran on sheer amusement. After I met you, my life ran on sheer compassion. 
This is the us you wanted us to be, Gwen. 
He needed to gather her up, hold on to her, anything to help her stop trembling. Something was going to shake loose if she didn’t. 
My life before him was so simple and decided, now after him It's just After. 
The price of love is always just above that what your heart can afford 
Yes. And when a rake finally falls, he falls forever. 
He’s more myself than I am 
He was the most ordinary man in all the world, and yet in her memory he'd become luminous, like the prince in a fairy tale. 
You’re my woman. Of course I’m responsible for you. It’s my highest duty in life to take care of you, protect you. -Jason Dorsey 
I knew I couldn’t trust my illogical heart, and that meant I had to do everything in my power to stay away from him so I wouldn’t have to. 
Marriages maybe made in heaven, but a lot of the details have to be worked out here on earth. 
And givin' yourself to me can never be wrong 
Not even a repeat of Dawson’s Creek makes me feel better. 
When you can be this, why are you ever anything else? - Broken Verses 
I want to be part of your story. I want your story to rearrange the symbols in my mind. I want your voice to be my voice. 
You don't think I'm going to deflower you under your father's roof, do you? 
Put me down, I’m too heavy.” “You’re small enough to fit in my pocket. 
She didn’t sound overjoyed. She didn’t sound even slightly joyed. 
To the beginning of the rest of our lives. - Leo 
he is both the source of my happiness and the one i want to share it with. i have to believe that’s a sign. 
I've crossed a world of sand and tears in search of you. 
If you ever need to confirm that a girl is worth coming back from Hell for, show her your monster arm and see what she says. 
Your life is a book; make it a bestseller. 
You teach people how to treat you by what you accept. 
You ride well, but you don't kiss nicely at all. 
And baby, the way you move me it's crazy 
I'm doing what I've always done. Loving you and hoping you'll be brave enough to love me back. 
It's all life is. Just going 'round kissing people. 
She is by my side, as my sister, but he is my soul. He is my enemy, my tormentor, my demon. He is my beloved. 
He’d done it like he did everything else—with passion and total disregard for how much it might embarrass her. 
Even if you fall on the runway, I wouldn't blame you. It would mean that we made a mistake in choosing you. 
Real is not Dreams, Dreams are not Real, Unless you find the fine line and erase it 
He should probably make love to her. 
Love enters later in life through the cracks left by the first heartbreak. 
Romance is the sweetening of the soul With fragrance offered by the stricken heart. 
Hurricanes couldn’t remove you from my mind. You’re my world and I’m incapable of not loving you. 
You picked the wrong girl to dominate, Dracula. 
 if you can't see the good man he is, you need to unscrew them eyeballs of yours and try on a different pair. 
The man irritated her just like a rash. 
Don’t tell me your name. It’s likely to awaken my conscience, and that’s the last thing we want. 
He loved her all he could; but he couldn't love her very much. 
This isn't your world. It's your parents. Your world is still out there, waiting to be discovered. Always remember that. 
No pain could match the emptiness of separation, no agony rivaled the unreality of not being with her. 
He will one day meet his true love A fellow traveler on the road Her eyes will be his ocean In her ocean he will sail forever . 
Maybe I was in love with the idea of love. 
I saw wild, dangerous beauty. I saw devotion. I saw . 
Give me agony or give me death, I'll take thy heart as eternal breath 
I don't function without a heart, he said angrily and then added under his breath as he grabbed at the front of his Tshirt, He's right here. 
Every bride is beautiful. It’s like newborn babies or puppies. They can’t help it. 
Sex might satisfy, food might fuel, love might sustain, but without coffee, what is the point? 
You love me.” He kept gazing upward, his answer coming softly. “Yeah. I do. 
It's just the end of some things. And the beginning of others. 
Silly of me not to have realized it. One often finds Greek temples lurking in the woods of English estates. Sneaky things, temples. 
Love me like Saturday night, like three glasses of champagne, like the room is spinning, like you're drunk on my love. 
fairy tales, just a fancy word for lies 
Saying you're through with romance is like saying you're done with living, Betty. Life is better with a little romance, you know. 
If you can forget the person you love, you have not loved enough. 
We're all the same in the dark. 
Love is not about lovers. 
Wouldn’t you rather play chess, Ma’am? .It’s less destructive of clothes. 
I fell for her like a suicide from a bridge. 
Love is not maximum emotion. Love is maximum commitment. 
Fuck me,” I whispered, giving him permission, taking him into my flesh, a soft invitation to madness. 
Even before we met and long after we're both gone, my heart lives inside of yours. I'm forever and ever in love with you. 
The minute I'm in a little pain your rough, tough, scary bad boy image totally falls apart. 
Draw a circle, not a heart, around the one you love because a heart can break but a circle goes on forever. 
Blake pointed at the bed of army jacket, grass, and mint. 
If she were gone I would be nothing. You should think better of yourself than to settle for that. 
You two were in a cave together?’ said Miss Simpkins in horror. ‘Yes,’ said Kate, ‘and it was very, very dark. 
You know if you would just do as I say I wouldn't have to hurt you. 
I love you, baby girl. When you’re sad, I am too. 
Then his beautiful lips touched hers. A fluttering of wings, a cry of angels, a single beat of two hearts. 
Long ago she'd clamped an iron shell around her heart and nothing and no one could pry it lose, but deep inside the tender flesh still beat. 
I realize that even through the hard times I’m sure we’ll face, I’ll never be able to walk away from her. -Micha 
Romantic literature is in effect imaginative lying. 
I will have to admit, though, that I will never look at an apple in quite the same way. 
I always have many roads to travel, but I take the one which leads to you. 
my boy? he is even better than books. -fiction has nothing on you. 
Would you believe I was in the neighborhood? 
Finally, mutually, and completely, they released all doubts, abandoned all fears, unwilling and unable to deny this overpowering love. 
Love can cause problem and love can heal humanly problems based on our virtue. 
Nobody with any real sense of humor *can* write a love story . Shakespeare is the exception that proves the rule. (90-91) 
How can the most cruel and despicable create something as breathtaking beautiful as this? 
Oh yeah? How about M'Lin the cursed? 
Sounds like you kids have some talking to do. I'll be eavesdropping from the kitchen. 
Will you love me enough? 
No one can be a replacement for another person. That is why, farewells are always difficult. 
Often you don’t know whether you’re the hero of a romantic comedy or the villain on a Lifetime special until the restraining order arrives. 
There ain't a man in the world cares about a woman's past until he's thinking of her in his future. 
It was heaven. Forget angels, forget St. Peter and glittering harpsichords. Heaven was a dance in the arms of one's true love. 
Recent studies have shown that approximately 40% of authors are manic depressive. The rest of us just drink. 
Some guys are worth breaking the rules for. 
Love should feel like a hand sewn quilt made by grandma, wrapping you up on a cold winter morning. 
His walk and stare. Was as poisonous as the air after a nuclear bomb. 
My life was dark, torture and empty before you found me. You brought the light, Red. I love you. 
And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with him 
If you could live anywhere in the world where would you live ” “Right here ” Enzo replies. “In your arms. 
The weakness of a man is the strength of a woman 
I am amazed at how being with him changes everything for me, socially speaking. 
He called me his 'dream.' I guess now I've become his nightmare. 
Even when this world is a forgotten whisper of dust between the stars, I will love you. 
John Brooke is acting dreadfully, and Meg likes it! 
If ever there was something she needed to stick around and fight for, Luc was that something. 
What can I do?” he asked. “To start taking care of you? 
Oh, how wonderfully romantic of you. Romantics are really only in love with themselves. 
If he was planning to attack and ravish, he gave no indication of being in a hurry to do so. 
The insanity of love, and that’s why you’re trying to drive away with the park brake on. 
Ours is a love people write stories about 
When a girl smiles, she's as beautiful as a blooming flower. 
If there's one common thread throughout all of history, it's that people have always fallen for the wrong people. 
I chose the path less traveled but only because I was lost. Carry a map. - Phoebe Traeger 
There are many forms of love as there is moments in time, and you are capable of feeling them all at different stages of your life. 
Creativity is the catalyst to the future. 
Romance is a tender kiss with a lingering promise of more to come. 
I said alone!” He nodded in agreement. “Aye, you usually say that, and I still stay. It’s our way. 
No I'm not a dream, I'm your worst nightmare 
He could feel her laughter against his chest, and at that moment he thought that there was no better feeling than making Emma Morley laugh. 
I may be heaven-sent, but I'm not perfect. 
We do not remember days, Shemei, we remember moments, and the richness of life lies in memories we have forgotten. 
Oh dios mio, she makes me burn, she makes me need. She is etching herself into mi alma 
Baby, where we're going, you won't need a shirt. 
We’re adults. I might be a little more of an adult if you’re counting years but I bet I have a lower IQ, so that puts us pretty much even. 
She realised she was whimpering. Sir held her closer, his hard grip reassuring. This wasn't a dream; he really was here. 
So it's over I guess they are in love or do they just think it huh. 
Until meeting you, I wasn’t looking for anything at all. Since meeting you, I’m kind of looking for a girlfriend. 
They call her love, love, love, love, love. She is love, and she is all I need. 
If you want, I can carry you—” “I’m fine,” she said shortly. “Let’s go.” He’d said that wrong. He should have said, “I want to carry you. 
All those who love know exactly the limit they're prepared to go to. They know exactly what is required. 
Majority of women like to fantasize and men like to romanticize. I saw a painful mountain in her eyes. 
Movie without romance feels like food without flavor. 
There is no hope for the hopeless but there is always some love for the loveless. 
That’s the last time I put you in charge of the tequila when we’re making margaritas 
Men's eyes were made to look, let them gaze, I will budge for no man's pleasure. 
Even the boy who cried wolf as right about the wolf once. 
Far from a normal-functioning relationship, but normal has never been our thing. 
The thing I am most afraid of is love. When you say you love someone you are giving them license to hurt you. 
lean in to kiss me in all the places where the ache is the most special. 
What comes from the heart will go to the heart 
There is no cosmetic to gain a beauty like yours. 
You are the beautiful and elusive pinpoint of radiance that lit up the darkness and called me home. 
Never stop believing that your dreams are eternal. 
He wasn't aware of it but when he smiled he looked like an amiable bear. When he didn't smile he didn't look amiable 
On a ship that's made of paper, I would sail the seven seas. (Just to be with you.) 
Matt was almost completely naked. A tattered loincloth and an ugly chain with a yellow diamond were his only apparel. 
I’m the guy who knows how you can hurt so much that your insides feel like they’re cut and bleeding. 
Smile. it's the second best thing you can do with your lips. 
Always go after the girl. No matter what she says. Chase her. 
If the human heart sometimes finds moments of pause as it ascends the slopes of affection, it rarely halts on the way down. 
He loves her for everything she is and is not. She’s old enough to appreciate that. 
Every girl should have at least one wild fling on her resumé. 
A kiss is only as sweet as the heart that gives it. 
Maybe illusion and artifice—lies, even—are a necessary part of romance. 
My name's Sean, Jem. I'm Sean. 
How about we give each other everything we can and not blame each other for what we can’t. 
Suck on this, Edward. 
I think I love you, Bennett. Probably not relevant at the moment so no need to say thanks. 
It kept him alive, he was certain; even more, it kept his darkest of his demons at bay. 
Love and ego can never exist together, just as the Sun and shadow cannot. 
Oh, aye. I'm the devil all right. And last night, you were begging to step into the fire. 
Conn was a wickedly passionate, fiercely dominant man who loved her too much to ever really hurt her. 
Honest to God, she was the noisiest woman he'd ever been shot at with. 
You ought to be blowing me kisses, wench. 
Constitutional democracy, you see, is no romantic notion. It's our defense against ourselves, the one foe who might defeat us. 
Find the pitch and pace and syllables and words you love to hear. Delight your own senses, and self-romance. 
What sort of look are you going for?” Damn, how did he answer this? “Something…normal,” he finally said. 
You have to be a romantic to invest yourself, your money, and your time in cheese. 
It took me two years to give him all of my heart, and he threw it away in one night. 
It’s always funny watching something so beautiful not know how beautiful it really is. It’s sad even. 
She was an exotic flower amongst the snowdrifts, out of place, a Technicolor misfit in a monochrome Christmas movie. 
He had taken George, my beloved George, from me. And he had taken my other self: Anne. 
My favorite color is you. 
A man's weakness is a woman's beauty a woman's weakness is falling in love. 
I think he could handle being used. It would be good for him. He's having trouble sleeping. 
fantasy is not practice for what is real—fantasy is the opiate of women. 
Lips to lips, mouth to mouth, Comes the speaker of the shrouds, Suck in the spirit, speak the words, Let secrets of the dead be heard. 
Above all, she wanted to look as though she had not given the matter a moment's thought, and that would take time. 
Scent is the strongest tie to memory. 
It would ha' been a good deal easier, if ye'd only been a witch. 
Pray as if all things depend on God, and work as if all things depend on you. 
You are my one and only, for all eternity. 
You totally love him. He's your widdle snookums. 
All romantic novels end the same way, but it's the process of getting there that provides all the enjoyment. 
Just one look and then I knew that all I longed for long ago was you 
Gradually, we have become each other's weather. 
Life is a book. We fill the pages. 
You’re staring at my ass.” “Yes, I am.” It’s what he did in the mornings, when she woke up and spent the first hour lying around in bed. 
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little fears grow great, great love grows there. 
It's the Snickers bars. Snickers equal romance. 
Forgive me for being the stupidest man on the planet?” “Careful. You’re talking about the man I love. 
Lady Ponsonby was right. The forbidden fruit isn't shaped like an apple. It's shaped like a banana. 
I know every guy here, and they’re all pretty much jerks. 
Don’t freak out, I’m getting into the bed,” he said. 
Kas was right: a woman could destroy a man. This one could do so, simply by knowing his name. She could do so, simply with her eyes. 
My hope, my heaven, my trust must be, My gentle guide, in following thee. 
If you do not love me I shall not be loved. If I do not love you I shall not love. 
Lips that have tasted the salt of tears always give the sweetest kiss. 
He has the body of a professional athlete, chiseled to perfection in all the right places. 
Wow,” she said. “Do you realise how wonderful you sound?” “Yes, I do,” he said with a firm nod. “And I think I’m underappreciated. 
How do you know?” “Well, I don’t, I’m making this up, but I bet I’m right. 
His lordship and I are opposite sides of very different coins. 
All the friends in the world are in the fountain of a pen. 
Love me less,but love me for a long time. 
His hope wasn't lost, it was buried, and somehow Prudence Ryland made that old grave seem much more shallow than it once was. 
You keep showing up here? Being who you are?' There was a pause. 'I'm going to fall in love with you.' -Rehvenge 
All my life I have lived within the very hours of the hands of love. 
Love is total surrender, total acceptance and total commitment. 
I want these gentle hands and this kind smile although I should not want such a thing. 
The world is dyed with the color of blood. It will never be able to go back to the way it was before. 
…..she needed him to know she did not care. She was spirited, tenacious, and full of contempt for him. 
So please, just let me be egocentric and ask you to stay. 
I'll never love you anymore than I do, right this second. And I'll never love you any less than Ido, right this second. 
Now she had to pretend not to love the man she was pretending to love while pretending she wasn't sleeping with him. 
There are certain kinds of silence that make you walk on air. 
You cannot mistake this You cannot reinvent this moment You cannot call this love It is so much more 
What happened to romance? sappy soppy longhand love letters. 
For a woman to deny the necessity of true love in her life would be to deny herself, and her creator. 
Weave the circle, tightly sewn, Let nothing evil or unknown Enter within. Stay without On pain of death, we cast you out. 
We’ll make out for a while and you’ll feel better. 
Hello, dinner. It’s me, I’m starving. And I know where you live. 
He buried his hands in the rich velvet of her hair. “I thought I’d die for wanting you. 
Life was wonderful, so filled with people and activities, with love and laughter. 
Hell had frozen over and I was lost in its endless labyrinth. 
Did you let him know that if he can't see fit to return your blow job immediately, you will have no choice but to sue? 
Welcome back, Jem. 
But just for a minute. I won't be gone long and if she wakes up before I get back tell her that I love her. 
I had buried my romance in a bed of asphodel. 
But then it was over too quickly and they pulled away. She knew they couldn't stand there and kiss like a couple on the run in a thriller. 
Anger precedes hate, while love vicariously hangs in the balance. 
Romance is everything to turn it into a cause for given is priceless 
Later she would think about how he'd snuck up on her so silently. The man was on crutches - what was he, a ninja or something? 
Love starts as a feeling, But to continue is a choice; And I find myself choosing you More and more every day. 
What was the point? What is the point in love, and promises of it, when it can just jump from one person to another like that? 
But there was a difference between being stuck and choosing to stay. Between being found and finding yourself. 
Denial can be beautiful But only when you're a fantastic liar 
i write because it is the only way i can reach you. 
You think he’s perfect and he’s safe and, in your head, he can do anything but he can’t save you, Sara and I can’t save you either. 
He is fairer than the morning star, and whiter than the moon. For his body I would give my soul, and for his love I would surrender heaven. 
A light rain touches my cheek like an angel's butterfly kisses. 
Beauty is in the heart of the beholder. 
Wolves mated for life. Where was he? Where was the echo to her howl, her mate? Was there no other lone wolf, searching the hills for her? 
When it comes to love, Princess, rules blur, and traditions fade, 
I am sure that God has given all his time in making you, the remaining human race has been created in haste. 
Don't expect a man will try any harder to keep you than he did to get you. 
there really is a place where kisses taste like apple pie and where stars spill like sugar across the sky. 
I’m a creature of the night.” Slitted eyes peered at her suspiciously. “Good God, you’re not a morning person, are you? 
I have been used to consider poetry as the food of love. 
If ur laptop doesnt smell like fire then ur losing. 
I said, you're the beat of my heart, the breath in my body, the light in my soul. 
Do you know where your breakthrough begins? Your breakthrough begins where your excuses ends. 
That's it I'm completely giving up on boys and concentrating on staying alive. 
Obsessing over a boy makes the time fly. 
I can’t rock you on my lap, if you’re not here. 
If I were being honest with myself, he lit a blaze, not just a blush, but that’s too much reality for me to admit. 
I focused, rather embarrassingly, on his chest which was rising and falling slowly. I left teeth marks! 
You're a rose, the perfect flower. I'm a carnation, just a cheaper substitute. 
A vampire's thirst can only be quenched by the blood of their loved ones. 
Love outweighs the liabilities. 
Love is when you’d rather see someone one last time and die, than never see their face again. 
Soul bonds can't be broken. They only bend for a while  
Are you exciting to be with or are you boring like the rest of them? 
Young man, the truth is what you create. 
Oh, you want me to lie still while you check me out? Damn, Red, if I'd have known that earlier I would've been horizontal already. 
Having declared a passion for his wildness, she had sought from the beginning to tame him. 
Was it enough to wear the night with me just once? I am unsatisfied. 
I hope you outlive me so I never have to know what life is like without you. 
The curves of your lips rewrite history. 
There is a perfection in everything that cannot be owned. 
She's magic, Cassandra. A single flower blooming in an endless desert. 
I’m not that pitiful little girl you bullied last year. 
Never to be squandered ..the miracle of another human being. 
Without attachment, a naked body is merely a lifeless sex-toy. 
I want to introduce myself to every freckle on your body. 
There is only one kind of love, but there are a thousand different versions. 
I never had any preference for her, any more than I have a preference for breathing. 
That casual glance was the beginning of a cataclysm of love that had still not ended half a century later. 
What the dev— er, deuce did you do that for? It hurt!” “Good,” said the angel. “I was afraid these new shoes would not be sturdy enough. 
Trust me,’ he says with a touch of impatience. ‘Stop asking me to do that,’ I say, equally as impatiently. 
Your big scary husband is crying. 
I will not let them harm you. I will protect you 'till my last breath. 
If you don't start playing by my rules, you'll be lucky to be licking stamps in some lowly, legal aid office. 
Is there anything sweeter than the touch of another as she pulls a dead bug from your fur? 
Marry me. You'll learn to love me, I promise. 
Gay Sex Three, Straight Sex Nil 
I clung to each word that fell from his lips like a spider to a web. 
Okay, babe, I'm here.” The front door smashed opened, slamming against the wall— 
Every men wanted to be his friend and every woman wanted to be in his bed 
As we stood there, chest high in water, I felt like I was in the middle of my own romance novel. 
What was the point of starting a new life if she did everything the same as her old one? 
Love me for stupid reasons, I like those most. 
Unbidden, Unwelcome, Yet unable to resist, I entered a stranger's life 
the unexpected moment [is] always sweeter. 
You, me---we're not the same, but we---our lives---somehow fit together. 
You’re Seriously, what happened to you? Have you been taken over by a pod person? 
I want to bask deeply in the taste of his blood, in that flowing crimson filled with his feelings melted in it 
Maddie swallowed hard and tried to channel… which actress? Damn, she couldn’t think of an actress to save her life! She was on her own. 
Misunderstanding and distrust—the predominant elements of a novel. Without them, everyone lives happily from beginning. 
You said she's a senior? Babe we're ALL crazy. 
I felt like a thief with a bagful of stolen glances. 
Gem, there is an exception to every rule and we are going to be it. I'm not losing you. 
Holy Bon Jovi, the queen of darkness actually had a soul. 
Don't be jealous, be agressive. Make 2012 yours! 
I think he revalued everything in his house according to the measure of response it drew from her well-loved eyes. 
It doesn’t matter if you don’t love me right away,” he said. “Just give me a chance. 
My life would be sour grapes and ashes without you 
Love is a trick best performed by men. 
Never give a woman flowers to say I love you . Tell her how much you love her and you will wake up looking at the flowers beside her bed. 
Sometimes you can cattle rope your heart and sometimes you can't, is all. 
Sexy with a capital SEX. 
You, my dear, are a creature of the night, you are a vampire. 
Viola to Duke Orsino: 'I'll do my best To woo your lady.' [Aside.] 'Yet, a barful strife! Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife. 
Bringing Thoughts 2 Life 
I'm not going anywhere. 
You’re supposed to pinch yourself – not the one you’re dreaming about. 
She gazed at him alluringly and grinned. No further words were necessary. 
For all the awkward girls that think they’re alone. You’re not. 
They kissed in the middle of the sidewalk, letting the crowds of people flow around them like water around an island. 
Miss Masters was not content with threatening to hire away his staff, oh no. First, she had to perfume it. 
Your poetry--it doesn't deserve to be locked away, hidden from the rest of the world. And neither do you. 
stronger than mountains. a place where my heart feels the safest- underneath his shirt. 
People make mistakes all the time – some of us just are in more of a position to leave an impact when we do. 
In a word, it was impossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present, from the innermost life of my life. 
The heart has its own reasons that reason can't understand. 
i immerse myself in you like i immerse myself into a beautiful story. 
Then, by your definition I'm in love with you. 
Sex is more exciting on the screen and between the pages than between the sheets 
We couldn’t be friends. We couldn’t be enemies. So what were we? 
Anything for Byron’s least favorite apprentice. It’s the least I can do since you took over my torch. 
Someday, Ry, you are going to realize who Darren really is. He’s a prince, and he’s only going to break your heart. 
You can be a great man and still be a fool. Many of our country’s leaders can attest to that. Were they still living. 
Loving you was like jumping into the dark side of a pool, and drowning. 
The first rule in the book of love is acceptance. 
Chains chains that hold me to the ground chains that keep me solidly bound chains that tether my heart to you chains that only one truth 
One doesn't fall into love one digs a hole for himself to trip claiming he didn't see it coming 
The sweatshirt was big on her and she looked ridiculous. He liked it. And he liked that she was wearing something that carried his scent. 
Romance is very pretty in novels, but the romance of a life is always a melancholy matter. They are most happy who have no story to tell. 
Darling, if I take your breath away, I will give you mine. 
I thought I had everything until I found you. 
If Fancy's lips had been real cherries probably Dick's would have appeared deeply stained. 
Only a heart that knows how to love can ever be broken. 
If they really want us to be happy, they'd let us pick ourselves. 
Please Tell me what your favorite flavor of ice cream is 
Being amongst rough lives and confusion does not make you less, it only makes your beauty shine out more clearly. 
I write--because I must write. 
you’ll have to fall in love at least once in your life, or Paris has failed to rub off on you. 
I would not have imagined that love himself would have such a fatal blow this. 
It would be too easy to become infatuated with a man like him, and also decidedly unwise considering the female debris left in his wake. 
He thoroughly intended to do some major grovelling. Olympic-style begging, if necessary. 
So what if the air in Paris smells of romance? My shirt smells of you. 
Pick a sunset, and we'll ride off into it together. 
Because you have my heart, Virgilia Wessex.” Softly, almost achingly. “Every black ounce of it. Scars and all. 
It is possible to compromise in certain areas when choosing a partner for life, but never on a cravat. 
She trailed off when she realised Will was turning a dull red. For a big, muscular guy, he sure blushed a lot. 
[Ever been kissed?] Of course-- --Why?-- 
We have formed a sick little friendship over the past year 
We are only victims if we allow ourselves to be. 
Only great fools remain ungrateful. 
I don’t want to hear it. Go back to Sammy and get your platter of gonorrhea with a heaping side order of chlamydia. It’s free. Please leave. 
Dream big and never give up on those dreams. Who knows where they'll take you? 
Bella: I love you. Edward: You are my life now. 
I felt the same way the world felt about Kurtis; It revolved around him. 
We both must burn this midnight oil together. You’re just as new to me as I am you.” --Andrew 
It’s been said that I have a problem admitting when I’m wrong. The main reason is because I never am. 
When you are in a room with Kurtis, whether its one or a hundred he is the only person that matters. 
Maligned –powerfully-drawn characters acting out a disturbing view of our future.” -David Compton, New York Times Best-Selling author 
I love you, Louise Downe McCord. You drive me absolutely crazy sometimes, and this is one of those times, but I love you. 
Mistakes? That's why they put erasers on pencils. 
The features of character are carved out of adversity. 
I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me..Phil 3:14 
You could have arrived atop a wildcat and no one would have said a word. They will adore you. 
I wait, with some impatience in my pulse, but no doubt in my breast. 
It's not a romance, it's a love story. 
You don't lose a partner you've been with for 30-odd years and just wake up one day with a smile. 
With that, I took a deep breath and leapt; spreading my arms, pretending I could fly  
It's hard to walk away from a winning streak, even harder to leave the table when you're on a losing one. 
Because in some other universe, you are me, I am you, and we are perfectly happy together. Or perhaps not… and just like this… 
There ought to be a law that allows eavesdroppers to sue. 
Devon Hamilton-Zemaitis was a beautiful woman. Being dead didn't change that. 
I will be so glad for you to hear not the sounds of gunfire but the sounds of church bells, and of people working in peace. 
You remarked once in a fit of pique you had made me famous. You were wrong, my dear. You have made me. 
Kevin had been born to make love to a man, the same way I had. 
So you've taken to spying on her. It must be love. 
The first kiss is never just a kiss but a beautiful place you get to go only once. 
True vice, my lady, would frighten us all, if it did not wear the mask of virtue. (p.56) 
I tell you all the time, you will never be able to replace me with a brass and steam contraption. 
The northern star changes its position every ten thousand years, but friendships can last for all eternity. — RJPeters 
He grinned, a very dark and evil grin… the kind of grin that the Grinch had before he stole Christmas. 
Enough with the sadness! This dream is not for cry-babies ” he said, his face beaming with a wide smile. 
For thy sweet love remembr'd such wealth brings That then, I scorn to change my state with kings. 
All I knew was, my Father was famous for being a loser, and a loser that wanted nothing to do with me, since the day I was born. 
Reach for the Stars! 
I am 15 and you are 51, I know you are the best, to be loved by, everyone. 
Dammit. I think I’m in like with the naked man I met today. 
If hate motivates your life, you'll never know the meaning of true love 
Looking back at him was a man who was battered and broken. And alive, for the first time in his life. 
He wanted to die. He prayed for it. Through the roar in his ears, he begged for it. 
Was she on some sort of Candid Camera version of This is Your Sucky Love Life? 
We fell asleep as lovers do, listening to the raindrops pitter-patter on the old tin roof, hands entwined and souls secretly smiling. 
Caine was a murderer. A liar. A cad. A skulker in shadows and a heartless wretch. What sort of woman or God would love someone like him? 
He heard the voice that had called to him in dreams, had saved him from the sands and from following his brother into the river. 
I should have been bolder and kissed her at the end. I should have been more cautious. I had talked too much. I had said too little. 
Fine! He is being passive aggressive with me, and it's gonna backfire; I'm gonna be active friendly. 
Love is not an antidote of depression or loneliness, but it itself is a cause of depression and loneliness. 
You’re a nosy sleuth like me because you can’t help it,” Alma said. 
Sometimes it feels like even if Every inch of my skin was touching yours I still wouldn’t be close enough to you. 
If one thousand of you participate in the murder of one child, then one thousand of you are a thousand times guilty. 
when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at the very borderland of life’s mystery. 
No crime is a means to an end. No crime can be rationalized. 
You have to appreciate where you have come from to know who you are in the present and whom you would like to be in the future. 
You are the ruler of my heart. There is no measure greater than this. 
Never surrender to you're passions. Dream and live to excess. 
I want to be able to love you, more than I fear losing you, and I don’t know how. 
Love is one of those topics that plenty of people try to write about but not enough try to do. 
Totally present in this moment for you. 
Don't get me wrong. I'm happy to be your morning lollipop, but I need to eat, too. 
I married a man who was as much a part of me as my own soul. 
So how did you do it? What makes the cold-hearted princeling mortal like the rest of us? 
Was he trying to rescue her? She fought not to roll her eyes. Men. 
So that’s it? You’re just going to rescue me and go? 
Prayer is an insurance policy that you can never lapse on. 
I don’t have cookie-cutter relationships, Rumi. Women aren’t iPhone apps that I download and discard! 
Keeping the box closed just keeps you in the dark, not the universe but failing to open the box doesn't kill the cat. 
the idea that 'Life' contains situations more interesting and more romantic than all the romances ever written. 
Romance only comes into existence where love is fatal, frowned upon and doomed by life itself. 
… I suppose that it is not so easy to go home and it takes a bit of time to make a son out of a stranger. 
If you can't focus then how do you expect to make your dreams come true? 
But something about Clint tossed off sparks that set her nerves on fire. 
The house was the color of baby vomit. 
I’m tickling a traced pattern over her bare hip. She’s pretending to sleep. Her smile is an idiot. A bad secret keeper. 
I want to have an affair. 
I’d lick you numb, Mariah. You have no idea the things I’m capable of. 
What Hans had intended to end at a simple kiss quickly escalated into something neither one of them seemed able to stop. 
I think only when you are truly alone can you see you never were. 
I had liked him for all the wrong reasons. 
He’d pushed it back, where he’d kept the thought for weeks, but it wouldn’t stay. Wouldn’t stop. Wouldn’t let him go. 
I am an acquired taste. 
It doesn’t matter what’s wrong with him. We’re not going to act like he doesn’t exist. Not anymore. 
Everyone wanted me to be the bad boy, the label wanted it, the publicists wanted it, but I was just trying to be myself. 
She turned her painted blue eyes toward the assistant and said something in French before she left. 
The course of true love never did run smooth said by lysander 
Love, like Fortune, favours the bold. 
The slowest kiss makes too much haste. 
He studied her lips like they were a riddle he desperately needed to solve. 
Never been more truthful then right now, looking at you fixes everything. 
The vampire could woo any woman with his charisma and his charm, but he only wishes to romance her.. for eternity. 
I’ve been asking you to marry me since we met! What more do you want? 
In that one moment, I wrapped a thousand others. A lifetime of joy, sorrow, laughter, frowns, smiles, tears life! 
To have the opportunity to know your parents is to have the opportunity to truly know yourself. 
Maybe I am everything I knew that I would never be. I looked back at Jay and smiled. 
I was the silent and ever present figure in your life but you. 
so Leola thought that a modest romance with a hero in embryo could do no harm - might even be a patriotic duty. 
I am also an author. Please check out my novel, A Life Worth Dreaming About. 
No sentimentality, no romance, no false hope, no self-petting lies, merely that which is! 
She was so light; he could hold her all night without a problem. 
Caine might have smiled at her, had his heart not been breaking to smithereens inside of him. 
Oh, Lord, why was she doomed to adore a man steeped in blindness and utter stupidity? 
What is it?” “You have to promise you'll never leave me.” “Okay.” Jordan grinned, delighted at her easy agreement. 
Jenny was struck again by the contrast between his attractiveness and his shyness. It was endearing. 
She’d never known a man whose initial move was to undress the woman he wanted. 
, Jenny thought, . 
He didn’t deserve compassion. Sympathy. Not even understanding. He deserved worse, far worse than he had ever been given. 
Remembered pain tightened his mouth into a grim line. The weeks he’d spent looking for her had left permanent scars on his heart. 
You can’t possibly be afraid of trees. 
You’ve stopped crying. I’m glad. I don’t want you to cry anymore. 
Somehow, I did not finger you for a treasure-hunter.” “Oh, but I am,” without shame. “Her name is Titianni Aziz. 
I like the way you kiss-a couple of test kisses, then a huge kiss. 
Men were just plain ridiculous with how little time it took them to get handsome. 
I want you to remember this—you and I are in this life together. All the way. We don’t run just because we get sacked a few times. 
Unconditional conditions are sometimes conditioned to conditionally exist. 
You, sir, are the most phantom-like of all; you are a mere dream 
Time for us began to be measured by moments when we spoke, and moments when we longed to speak again. 
It was juvenile, he knew, this need to assign blame, but everyone had a right to childish emotions from time to time, didn't they? 
All things in Fiji are paid for in blood. 
Sleep. We can adore one another in the morning 
Romance is like maintaining a car. If you do a good job of it, you will always have a dependable quiet ride. 
I thought this would be the end of your antics. There are three hundred guests sitting in the church and suddenly you believe you can fly? 
The male gender remembers only the things that entertain them. 
Soon enough, Miner stopped caring who was watching - for a brief time, he and Ennek were a universe of two. 
Rene Caron takes my breath away! 
If I could have looked into the future to see what I would have become, I wouldn't have become the person I was always meant to be. ~ lw 
This is what people were looking at all day? How embarrassing! I looked like Quasimodo! My guests were exceptional actors. 
Roxanne Archer designed her strategy like a four-star general—or a stalker. 
I don't write romance. Read it? Yes. Write it? No. 
I’m waiting with baited breath to hear that silver tongue of yours. 
We're not mad. We're inhabited 
My ex calls the ochre winter 'autumn' as we queue to hear dock boys play jazz fugues in velvet dark.— Broken Verses 
The reader is the final arbiter. 
Some days are better than other days A good day is getting 10 royalties and 10 great reviews 
It is never too late to relearn, to change and to get memories for life 
Her fire is intoxicating I want her to burn me. To make me feel something other than the numbness that's enveloped my life 
Oh please, forget the words. Just turn and walk away. Don’t make me leave in your shadow. Don’t make me wanna stay. 
I’m not just a brain to you. I’m a person. 
Old Woman Nora of Loch Lomond To her three wee Grandaughters one cold night. 
I took a thousand breaths But none Could efface the one that smelled of you 
And we're kissing like it's breathing. 
It sounds cool to say you are going to fight with a pen not a sword but violence with words is still violence .. 
Writing a novel is like reading a book, you have to keep at it if you want to find out what happens next. 
Nine years of nurtured anger tangled with this . This gripping attraction and wistfulness—a deep missing of this woman from my life. 
You really are a detective. I guess that badge didn't come out of a crackerjack box. Does that mean the handcuffs are real too? 
What if we just went home and read books to each other? 
It didn't matter that I felt like a fool 'cause I forgot when she walked through the door. 
I believe that in matters of the heart there is no such thing as compromise. Love means that you give each other everything. 
There was no doubt he loved her. Had always loved her. Now with God's help he might be able to love her better. 
Each kiss was nearer to the last one of all. 
The moon & sun were just friends til that night the sun couldn’t depart before dark snowed in under an avalanche of stars & poetry was born. 
I wasn’t seeking a place, but a person. I’d come home. 
On a hill we rest, Watching virtue Hold the heavens. 
Moonlight bounces tears across the tops of trees, switch blade shadows at our throats, where life’s lacerations approach for romance. 
Who knew such belongings? That the truest love Could blend The margins of life Into forgotten wants. 
He didn’t want to see inside Lily’s heart; he didn’t want to know her beauty was the least remarkable thing about her. 
he'd asked her. And her life had changed. 
With you I could live, without you I was already dead. 
When the sun has been destroyed for a man, what comfort is there in a world of moonlight? 
Why should he worry himself about this woman? And why should he worry about anything else as long as he had this woman? 
Oh, how glorious it must be, to care nothing for society’s censure, but how terrible it must be, to care for nothing at all. 
I finally let someone else in and now the weight of what happened to me isn’t so heavy to carry around. 
I can bear to die - I cannot bear to leave her. 
He doesn’t hug back. But he doesn’t pull away, either. Yeah, we’re improving. 
I love you, Killian O’Brien. Every inch of you from your thick brown hair to your large warrior’s feet, and a good many inches in between. 
Life is not easy my friends But you need to actually decide What u want to leave as it is And what u want to hold tight 
You slept with twelve women in one day? Wow, that’s really impressive! And without Viagra!” the other man lowly declared to himself. 
No I don't love you. A part of me just dies whenever you go faraway from me. 
I’m a man again, and a man works. 
Now I know what he’s been hiding under these three-piece suits 
Music takes you halfway there. The story takes you the rest of the way 
Now, listen. I would. Rather. Hug you. Than be with. Anyone else. Just. Hug you. Do you. Want to. Hug me. Back. 
You show me an angel that breaks bad, and I’ll show you a devil in disguise. 
Why can't I find someone who loves being with me, as is, as much as I love being with them? 
It is the first thing I remember about him, and I can hear it still today. Later! 
Not tingling as much as a rapid-burning desire and longing. I want him to f**k me. Right here. Right now. 
I'm on edge, sunshine. Give me a moment to clam down. Maybe after I've had you a few times I'll be better. 
I’ve seen too much of what the spotlight can do to a person to ever crave it for myself. 
I have a feeling you two are going to tag team against me all the time, aren't you? 
If it doesn't hurt then it's not love'' -Swapna Rajput 
I don't know what it is about this man that makes me melt into a puddle. 
This time, when I look into his eyes, I see a gleam of mischief. And that's f**king exciting. 
Your little ladybug tried to seduce me with a cookie. 
Lord help the girl he set those eyes on for good. His boyish vulnerability was a weapon, powerful and disarming. 
You deserve to be the love of someone's life, not the one who followed that first act. 
I create entire romances in my dreams. 
She was his favorite sin. She was not a habit for him anymore, she was an obsession. 
I want to be the first thing you touch in the morning and the last thing you taste at night. 
Arthur might be a king, but he can’t make you come. 
He grinned against her lips. “Slow down before you tear off a part we both need. 
I’m working on my application for knighthood. But if you want something less chivalrous and more carnal, let me know. 
The best time of a relationship is when your eyes speak when silence says everything Expressions are the beak 
If she cant't make you laugh, she's not the one. 
What is it about you that makes me want to love you? 
Art is the word we give to our feelings made public and art doesn't worry anyone 
Okay, let me unwrap my present. Open those gorgeous legs. I want to devour my gift. 
He's all man. I bet he would look amazing in one of those gladiator costumes. 
That's exactly what it would be to fall in love with him again; pure trouble and a twice broken heart. 
Her heart was stupid. Her mind? Now that was something she could actually count on. 
She was like a drug and he was letting her get back in his system just by standing there with her. 
She was the most dangerous person to him when it came to avoiding attachments, trust and love. 
