In the name of Love, I swear that I would rather hear Heliodora's whisper in my ear than the shining harp of Apollo.
The moon is down, and the Pleiades.
It's midnight, time passes, and I lie alone.
I will plait white violets, myrtle, and soft narcissus too.
I will twine laughing lilies and sweet crocus, purple hyacinths, and the roses lovers cherish, so the wreath I set on lovely Heliodora's brow will scatter petals on her scented hair.
Hello there, rose girl, you have a rosy charm.
But what are you selling? Yourself? Your roses? Both? Wine is the test for love: Nikagoras told us he loved no one, but his many toasts betrayed him.
Oh yes! He bent his head and wept, and then his wreath slipped, half to cover the aching in those sad dark eyes.
If my kiss offends you then punish me with yours.
If someone's with her, I'll go, but if she's sleeping alone then for God's sake give me just a moment inside.
Tell her I'm drunk, that I've made my way past thugs and thieves to her door.
Tell her reckless Love was my guide.
Tossing, turning, back and forth, all night long on your empty bed.
Poor Krinagoras: you'll get no sleep till lovely Gemella lies by your side.
Don't try to bend a stubborn heart.
When you were a green grape you refused me.
When you were ripe in the bunch you sent me away.
Give me, at least, a bite of your raisin.
This tomb holds Archeanassa, the courtesan from Kolophon whose very wrinkles were graced by sweet Love.
Oh you lovers who gathered the fresh blossoms of her youth, what a fire you passed through! Melite, you have Hera's eyes, Athena's hands, Aphrodite's breasts and Thetis' feet.
Happy is the man who sees you, thrice-blessed is he who hears your voice, the one who kisses you finds paradise and he who marries you is a god.
Sweet for the thirsty is a drink of snow in summer, and sweet for sailors to run before spring breezes at winter's end.
But sweeter still is the single cloak that hides two lovers as they honor Aphrodite.
There is more to love than finding someone beautiful to please your critical eye.
This is love, this is fire: delighting in someone less than lovely and adoring her with a heart aflame.
Anyone can like a pretty face.
I'm a nobody, no one special, a nothing yet even I am loved.
Even I am the master of someone else's soul.
If hating is pain and loving is pain, then of these two bitter agonies give me the one that's bittersweet.
I love everything about you everything but that wandering eye of yours, so fond of the most vile of men.
Such was my passion for love that it twisted itself beneath my heart and spread thick mist across my eyes, stealing my tender wits away.
Melissa, you're the image of your namesake, the flower-loving honeybee.
I know this woman, and I take it to heart.
You kiss me, and your lips are honey.
You ask for money, and I am stung.
Doris drew a single strand from her golden hair and bound my hands, making me her prisoner.
At first I laughed, thinking I would easily shake off the lovely girl's ties, but when I had no strength to break them I groaned, like one held fast by brazen bonds.
And now, the most miserable of men, I hang on a hair, following my mistress wherever she wishes to drag me.
Delectable Theano came to stay with me, but she wept bitter tears all night long and cursed the rising evening star for pointing to the coming dawn.
We mortals are never satisfied.
We lovers must have dawnless nights.
Oh moody morning star, why have you chosen this, of all nights, to dawdle in your great spin around the world? Why tonight, when another lies warm and snug beneath my Demo's cloak? And why, when my slender love lay with me, did you come so soon to bring the light and laugh to end our tender night? Seeing Prodike alone and happy, I clasped her sweet knees and begged: Save a man who's nearly lost! Let me have what little life I've got! She wept as I spoke, but then she wiped away her tears and with gentle hands pushed me away.
Love shook my heart like wind pounding mountain oaks.
My wine cup's laughing, giggling, slipped between the sweet sipping lips of Zenophila, the girl who loves to love.
Lucky cup! If only she would bring her mouth to mine and with one breath drink down my very soul.
Tender Asklepias has clear blue eyes, gentle seas inviting us to set sail for love.
Here, Rhodoklea, is a garland, blossoms laced by my own hands.
Here are lilies and roses, moist anemones, soft narcissus and dark-gleaming violets.
Wear them, and cease to be vain.
Your beauty, like theirs, will fade.
Let's you and me jump into the bath together, Prodike.
We'll crown ourselves with garlands and drink our fill of unmixed wine.
Our time for rejoicing is short: soon we're old, then we're dead.
Why are you sighing? I'm in love.
With whom? A girl.
Is she pretty? Oh yes! Where did you meet her? At a dinner party.
Do you think you have a chance with her? I know I do, friend, but I want it kept secret.
Ah, so you don't plan to marry her? No, I've learned she's penniless.
What? Liar! You don't love her! How can a heart in love make calculations? Xanthippe's touch upon the lyre, her playful speech, her inviting eyes, her singing and the fire they have set will burn you.
Why and when and how I cannot say, but they will, poor heart, they will.
A girl kissed me in the early evening with wet lips.
Her kiss was nectar, her mouth divine.
And now I am drunk with the kiss, for I have drunk deeply of love.
Hardhearted Eros, if you burn my little soul too often she will fly away.
She has wings too.
She who sets whole towns on fire, Sthenelais, the high-priced girl who pours herself like gold over those with coin to buy her, lay naked beside me all last night, giving me all I wanted and more (and for free!) till dawn came and the end of my dream.
Never again will I grovel before her cruel beauty, nor sit and weep alone, for now I find my pleasure in sensual sleep.
Rufinus I've armed myself with Logic against Love, and if it's one on one he doesn't have a chance: I, a mortal, will stand against a god! But if he has Bacchus on his side it's two against one, and I won't have a prayer.
Diophanes of Myrina Eros is like a thief: sharp-eyed, bold, he robs us blind.
Meleagros Eros, still a babe in his mother's lap, played at dice one morning and tossed away my soul.
Meleagros This Love I have inside me is fond of playing ball, and to you, Heliodora, he throws my trembling heart, saying, ''catch!" Please play with him, Heliodora, and don't drop me; he has no patience with those who break the rules.
Palladas of Alexandria Lamplight only darkens the night of a man cursed with an ugly wife.
I send you sweet perfume, but more for its pleasure than for yours: you perfume perfume.
Anonymous Plato My soul was on my lips while I was kissing Agathon.
Wild thing! She came there hoping to sneak across to him.
Meleagros Give her my message, Dorkas.
Pay attention! Be sure to repeat it twice, no, three times.
Yes, Dorkas, the whole thing! All right, get going hurry! Hey Dorkas, wait.
Wait a second! Stop! Where are you going, Dorkas? I haven't finished yet; there's something else that .
(I'm such an idiot!) never mind, don't say anything at all.
No wait, tell her everything.
Dorkas, why am I sending you, anyway? Look, I'm going with you, I mean, step aside, Dorkas, I'll lead the way.
Meleagros Cupbearer! Fill our cups, and with each ladle say again and again "to Heliodora!" till the wine's mixed with her name, and crown me with the wreath she wore last night, a scented memory of her.
But look! The rose is weeping, for it knows tonight she's sleeping in someone's else's arms.
Plato You're my Star, a stargazer too, and I wish that I were Heaven, with a billion eyes to look at you! Philodemos I want no more white violets and lyre-song, no more Chian wines and Syrian myrrh, no more carousing and drunken whores I hate them all, they're driving me mad.
But wreathe me in narcissus and let me taste the cross flute, rub me down with saffron balm, moisten my tongue with wine from Mytilene and wed me to a hearth-and-home girl.
Philodemos Oh feet, Oh legs, Oh thighs I die for, Oh bottom, Oh mound, Oh flanks, Oh shoulders, Oh breasts, Oh slender neck, Oh hands, Oh eyes that drive me mad, Oh skillful moves, Oh exquisite tongue, Oh inspiring moans.
Yes, her name is Flora and she is Italian.
And no, she cannot sing Sappho's Greek.
Yet Perseus loved Andromeda, and she was Indian! Meleagros Timarion's kisses sting, his eyes are fire, his glances sear, his touch inspires.
Meleagros Even winged Eros himself is stricken (and in midair!) a victim of your eyes, Timarion.
Anakreon Look! Climbing this steep white crag I turn and leap (drunk with love) into the foaming surf below.
 Meleagros Heavy-laden ocean ships cruising down the Hellespont, sails full of the good North Wind, if you should see Phanion on the beach at Kos gazing out upon the blue sea tell her that love carries me there, though not on shipboard, but by land.
Tell her, good ships, and Zeus will breathe the fair wind of his affection into your broad sails.
Meleagros Shrill mosquitoes, shameless bloodsuckers, winged monsters of the night, please, I beg you: let my Zenophila sleep a while in peace, and come gorge yourselves on me instead.
But what's the use of begging? Even you relentless insects delight in the soft warmth of her body.
Still, I'm warning you, you nasty bugs: either stop your biting or you will feel the smack of my jealous hands.
Paulus Silentiarius They say a man bitten by a mad dog sees the beast's image reflected on the water.
I wonder: did Eros, rabid, sink his bitter fangs in me? I see you in the ocean deep, the swirling stream and the wine cup.
Anakreon I love, and I do not love.
I am mad, and I am not mad.
Antiphilos Hey beautiful! Wait up! What's your name, honey? When Can I see you again? We'll do whatever you like.
Hey, don't you speak? Where do you live? I've have a slave see you home.
You're not attached, are you? Not talking? Well, goodbye then, you stuck-up girl.
Won't you even say goodbye? It doesn't matter, I'll be back.
I know how to soften a heart like yours.
But for now, baby, goodbye.
Marcus Argentarius You had love, Sosikrates, when you had money, but now that you are poor it seems there's no love left for you.
What a cure for love is poverty! Even Menophila, who used to call you her cutie and her darling Adonis, now asks who you are and where you're from.
I guess you've had to learn the meaning of that old saying: ''The man who has nothing has nobody for a friend." Palladas of Alexandria Zenon, war has broken out in your house because you married the daughter of Protomachos (first in a fight) and Nikomache (victorious in a fight).
What you need is a helpful adulterer, a Lysimachos (deliverer from a fight) who will take pity on you and deliver you from Andromache (man-fighter), the daughter of Protomachos.
 Meleagros It must have been Eros himself who sharpened Heliodora's fingernail; even her gentlest love-scratching pierces my heart.
 Asklepiades The night is long and wintry.
The Pleiades glimmer in the chilling dark.
Back and forth before her door I pass, soaking wet with rain and tormented by desire for her the cheater.
This can't be love! No! Aphrodite has shot me instead with agony, a burning dart straight from the fire.
 Sappho You came, and I was longing for you.
You cooled a heart that burned with desire.
  Asklepiades Didyme waved a twig at me and I was swept away.
Even now, gazing upon her beauty, I melt like wax before the fire.
Yes, her skin is dark and foreign, but what is that to me? The coals, too, are dark, but when we light them they shine as brightly as roses.
 Poseidippos Don't think you can fool me with those crocodile tears, Philainis.
I know the truth: As long as you're lying beside me you say there's no one you love more, but if you were with someone else you'd say you loved him more than me.
 Leontios Oh cup, touch her honeyed lips.
Taste them while you have the chance.
And know I don't begrudge your pleasure, I only wish I had your luck.
  I wish I were the wind, and that you, walking on the shore, would bare your breasts and take me to them as I blow.
Anonymous  Rufinus The silver-toed girl was bathing, letting the water splash and play upon the golden apples of her breasts, skin silky smooth as milk.
The round cheeks of her bottom gently rolled and tossed together as she turned and moved, flesh more fluid than the water that coursed down to where her fingers spread to cover the swelling flow not all of it, but as much as she could.
 Krinagoras Roses used to bloom in springtime, but now in deepest winter we burst into scarlet, smiling on your birthday morn and soon your wedding day as well.
Better to crown the loveliest of women than to wait for spring and sun.
 Rufinus Europa's kiss would be sweet resting lightly on the lips, the faintest touch upon the mouth.
But more, much more than this: she presses close and hard and pulls the soul up from my fingertips.
 Macedonius Every year the harvesters gather in the vintage, and not one frowns on the vines' curling tendrils.
I too am a harvester, holding rosy-armed you entwined in the supple knot of my embrace and gathering in the vintage of love.
No better summer, no other spring could ever be, for it's now that you are young and full of every joy, and I pray that you will stay this way forever.
But if some wrinkle like a tendril comes creeping, I will scarcely blink, because I love you.
  Marcus Argentarius Diokleia, you'll see, is thin, a skinny Aphrodite, though she has the most delightful ways.
Then not much will come between us.
I'll fall upon her little chest and lie as close as may be to her soul.
 I fell for her, I kissed her, I was lucky, I am loved.
But who I am, and who she is, and how it happened, God only knows.
Anonymous   Here, beneath this stone, I lie, the famous women who shed her clothes for only one man.
Anonymous  Sappho I feel like a god, sitting so close to you, listening intently to your gentle voice and sweet laughter.
I hear you, and my heart trembles in my breast.
I see you, and I can no longer speak; my tongue has snapped, and a thin quick fire runs beneath my skin.
My eyes are empty, my ears hum, and I am covered with sweat.
I shiver, pale as summer grass, and feel myself slip close to the edge of death.
 Sappho Happy bridegroom! The wedding you hoped for has happened; the maiden you prayed for is yours!  Archilochos All I want is to touch Neoboule's hand.
 Palladas of Alexandria A grammarian's daughter made love with a man and bore a child masculine, feminine, and neuter.
 Sappho Some say a host of horsemen, others a troop of infantry, others still a fleet of ships is the fairest sight on the dark earth.
But I say it is the one you love.
And this is easily proved, for Helen, the most beautiful of women, sailed off to Troy without a thought for her child and kin, thinking of her beloved alone.
I think of Anaktoria, who is far away, for I would rather see her gentle step and the glad radiance of her face than all the chariots and armed men of Lydia.
 Lucilius Eutychos the painter produced twenty sons and never got a single likeness.
 Meleagros Marathonis laid Nikopolis in this stone tomb, wetting the marble with tears that fell in vain: Only sorrow remains when a man's wife is gone.
 Meleagros My soul warns me to run from Heliodora, the cause of my past hurts and tears.
She begs me to flee, but I cannot bring myself to leave.
The shameless girl herself says I should go, but all the while she covers me with kisses.
 Rufinus I used to pray, Thalia, for the night when you would come and I would satisfy my longing with armfuls of luscious you.
And now you are here, naked and willing beside me, but I am loose and limp with sleep.
Wake up, body! How can you do this to me? I may never have this chance again!  Agathias Anxious to learn if fair-eyed Ereutho really loved me, I tested her heart with a clever ploy: ''I'm leaving," I said, "for a far-off land, but you must stay behind, my darling, faithful to me and our love until at last I return." Then, crying out, she leaped up, struck her face with her fists, tore her curls, and begged me stay until, like one not easily persuaded, and with a disappointed look, I gave in to her.
Now I am happy in my love, for I have the thing I most wanted, and by granting it as a favor too!  Sappho You make me burn.
 